
Genetic Basis of the Immune Response 

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

The immune system of vertebrates is a genetically controlled mechanism that defends the body against disease-causing organisms.
Extensive genetic recombination in somatic cells reshuffles a limited number of genes into new combinations that produce literally millions of different antibodies and cell-surface receptors.
Cell-surface antigens play a role in determining blood types and in the success of transfusions and organ transplants. 
The proliferation, differentiation, and function of cells in the immune system are all under genetic control, and mutations in these genes result in disorders of the immune system.

As vertebrates evolved, they developed a unique and complex genetic mechanism crucial to their survival.
This mechanism, called the immune system , coordinates a series of defensive responses to the entry of foreign substances or the invasion of viruses and microorganisms into the body.
These responses are specific and involves two phases:
a primary response to the initial exposure, and a secondary response to subsequent exposures to the same agent.

From a genetic standpoint, the immune system has two fundamental characteristics.
First, in every individual, it must recognize "self" so that an organism's cells and tissues are not attacked by its own immune system.
This recognition involves a set of genes that, in humans, is located on chromosome 6.

Second, the immune system must be able to produce specific cells (killer cells and others) and gene products (antibodies) that neutralize and subsequently destroy "nonself" agents (antigens). 

Antibody production against potential antigens is a remarkable genetic accomplishment.
From a set of less than 300 genes, recombination events within developing antibody-producing cells create a vast immune potential.
As a result of shuffling this limited number of genes, tens of millions of different antibodies can be produced.

In this chapter we will examine the cells that make up the immune system and how these cells and their gene products are mobilized to mount an immune response.

We will also examine the role of the immune system in determining blood groups and mother-fetus incompatibility, how cell-surface markers are used in transplants, and how these markers can be used in a predictive way to determine risk factors for a wide range of diseases.
Finally, we will consider a number of genetic disorders of the immune system, including mutations in single genes that inactivate the entire immune response.
We will also describe how acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) associated with infection by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) acts to cripple the immune response of infected individuals. 
Taken together, work on the immune system constitutes one of the most exciting areas of genetics, one where new information and new breakthroughs occur with increasing frequency.

Components of the Immune System 

The immune system is an effective barrier against the successful invasion of potentially harmful foreign substances.
Invading viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites are recognized as nonself and subsequently sequestered, inactivated, and destroyed by the immune system.
This immune response usually involves antibodies specific to foreign substances.
Agents that elicit antibody production are termed antigens .
Antibodies are proteins produced and secreted by specific cells of the immune system. 
Many different molecules can act as antigens, including proteins, polysaccharides and, rarely, other molecules such as nucleic acids.

Usually, a distinctive structural feature of an antigen, called an epitope , stimulates antibody production. 
Invading antigens may be free molecules, or they may be part of the surface of a cell, microorganism or virus.

Whatever the case, organisms with an immune system have the capacity to make antibodies against any antigen they encounter. 

The two main branches of the immune system are:
(1) antibody-mediated immunity , associated with two types of blood cells, the antigen-recognizing T cells and the antibody- producing B cells ; and
(2) cell-mediated immunity involving a class of T cells known as cytotoxic or killer T cells 


Cells of the Immune System

One of the key cells in the immune system is the phagocyte , a white blood cell that engulfs and destroys foreign molecules and microorganisms (Figure 22.1).
One type of phagocyte called a macrophage plays a critical role in both antibody-mediated and cell-mediated immunity by signaling other cells of the immune system that foreign antigens are pre sent.
In this signaling role, macrophages are known as antigen- presenting cells .
All phagocytes arise from stem cells, which are mitotically active cells found in bone marrow (Figure 22.2).
Mature phagocytes have the ability to leave the circulatory system by squeezing through capillary walls to enter inflamed or damaged tissues to identify, engulf, and destroy antigens.

A second cell type, the T cell, is also produced by mitotic division of stem cells (Figure 22.2).
Newly produced, immature T cells migrate to the thymus gland where they develop into several different subtypes, including helper cells, suppressor cells, and killer cells .
During this period of maturation, T cells become programmed to produce a unique type of cell-surface receptor.
Each T cell produces one and only one type of receptor, called an antigen receptor , which in turn will bind to only one type of antigen. 
There are literally tens or hundreds of millions of potential antigens, and there are a similar number of differently programmed T cells.
The array of T cell receptors is produced from a small number of genes by genetic recombination events.

From the thymus, mature T cells become distributed throughout the circulatory and lymph systems, and they also become sequestered in the lymph nodes and spleen.
Mature T cells can divide, and all the offspring of a single T cell form a family group or clone.
There are two general classes of T cells:
T4 helper/inducer cells and T8 cytotoxic/suppressor cells.
The T4 helper cells are the master switch for the immune system; they turn on the immune response.
The T8 suppressor cells are the "off" switch of the immune system; they stop or slow down the immune response (Table 22.1).

Table 22.1

Cells of the Immune System

Cell Type.
Function.


T4 cells.
Also called helper T cells.
Role in both cell-mediated and antibody-mediated immune responses.
Master switch of the immune system.


T8 suppressor cells.
A sub-class of T cells that participate in cell- and antibody-mediated immune response.
Slow down and/or turn off the immune response.


B cells.
Precursors to plasma cells, B cells recognize antigens, and are activated by T4 cells.


Plasma cells.
Synthesize large quantities of a single antibody.
Produced mitotically from an activated B cell.


Memory cells .
Allow a rapid response to a second encounter with a specific antigen.


Killer cells.
A sub-class of T cells the can detect and destroy virus- infected cells.


A third component of the immune system, the B cells, originate in bone marrow (Figure 22.2) and migrate to the spleen and lymph nodes.
As they mature, these cells become genetically programmed to produce antibodies; each B cell produces only one type of antibody.
Antibody production is triggered in B cells by interaction with T4 helper cells.
These activated B cells proliferate to become plasma cells that produce large amounts of the antibody. 

Memory cells represent a subpopulation of B cells that participate in subsequent encouaters with a specific antigen. 

The Immune Response

The immune response involves four stages:
(1) the detection of foreign antigens, (2) activation of cells of the immune system, (3) inactivation of the antigen, and (4) shutdown of the immune response.
Each of these stages is directed by at least one specific cell type.
After exposure to an antigen and the generation of an immune response, subsequent challenges to the immune system by the same antigen are directed by a secondary immune response, also called immunological memory. 
This secondary immune response is also directed by specific cell types.
We will first examine antibody- and cell-mediated immune responses and then consider how immunological memory protects the body against reexposure to an antigen.

Antibody-Mediated Immunity

Macrophages wander through the circulatory system and inflamed tissues and are capable of responding to the presence of foreign molecules, viruses, or microorganisms.
When an antigen is encountered, it is engulfed and ingested by the macrophage (Figure 22.3).
After ingestion, fragments of the antigen are incorporated into the plasma membrane of the macrophage and displayed on its outer surface in a specific molecular context. 
As this antigen- presenting macrophage moves through the circulatory system or intercellular spaces, it may encounter a helper T4 cell with a complementary antigen receptor.
The receptors on the surface of the T4 cell react with the antigen, activating the helper T cell.
In turn, the activated T cell identifies and mobilizes B cells that synthesize an antibody against the antigen presented to the T cell.
The stimulated B cells begin to divide and differentiate to form two types of daughter cells.
One is the memory cell , and the other is the plasma cell , which synthesizes and secretes 2000 to 20,000 antibody molecules per second into the bloodstream (Figure 22.4). 

Antibodies (Figure 22.5) are effective against extra-cellular antigens such as bacterial cells, free virus particles, secreted toxins, and protozoan parasites in the bloodstream, or virus-infected cells that display viral antigens on their surface.
Antibodies work in several ways to inactivate antigens.
They can interact with the antigen to form antigen-antibody complexes. 
Clumping of the antigen-antibody complex tags the antigens for destruction, and they are ingested and destroyed by phagocytes. 
The combination of certain antibodies with antigens activates complement , a proteolytic system present in blood serum that lyses invading bacterial cells.
Antibodies can also interact with antigens to destroy their ability to function. 
For example, some viruses have proteins on their surface that help attach the virus to the cell surface as a prelude to viral infection.
Antibodies can react with this attachment protein and inactivate it, leaving the virus unable to infect cells and exposing it to ingestion and destruction by phagocytes. 

The memory cells produced by activated B cells also produce antibodies, but instead of a life span of several days, as is the case for plasma cells, memory cells have an extended life span of several months to years.
These cells play an important role in the secondary immune response (discussed below).

The entire immune response is monitored by T8 suppressor cells, and when detectable antigens have been inactivated or destroyed, the T8 cells stop proliferation of B cells and turn off antibody production.
Thus, T8 cells act as the "off" switch for the immune system.

Cell-Mediated Immunity

In contrast to the action of antibodies, which tag antigens for destruction by phagocytes, direct cell-cell interactions called cell-mediated immunity , carried out by a class of T cells, can also result in antigen inactivation. 
The T cells that participate in this form of the immune reaction are known as killer T cells or cytotoxic T cells (Figure 22.6).
Like other T cells, killer cells originate in bone marrow and mature in the thymus gland.

When a cell is infected by a virus, small fragments of the viral coat protein become incorporated into the cells plasma membrane.
These protein fragments are displayed as a new set of antigens on the surface of the infected cell, allowing killer T cells to identify and kill virus-infected cells.
Recognition by the killer cells involves both the viral antigen and a set of cell-surface markers known as histocompatibility antigens .
These antigens are encoded by the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex on the short arm of chromosome 6.
These markers also play a crucial role in grafts and transplants.

Their role in cell-mediated immunity helps ensure that only virally infected cells are attacked by killer cells.

Once identified, killer cells attach to their target cells (Figure 22.7) and secrete a protein called perforin , which inserts into the plasma membrane of the virus-infected cell.
The cylindrical perforin molecules link together to form pores in the plasma membrane.
The cytoplasm of the target cell leaks out through these pores, and the virus-infected cell dies.
The killer cell detaches from the dying cell, and it can identify and kill other infected cells.
In addition to killing virus-infected cells, cytotoxic T cells and a second type of killer cell known as a natural killer cell attack and kill cancer cells, fungi, and some types of parasites.
Cytotoxic T cells will also attack and kill cells introduced into the body during tissue or organ transplants if the transplanted cells are recognized as foreign. 

Immunological Memory and Immunization 

Even in ancient times it was known that people exposed to certain diseases cannot contract the disease a second time. 
For example, people who have had measles (an infectious disease caused by a virus) will not get measles again, even when they are exposed to infected individuals.
Resistance to second infections is controlled by the secondary immune response and the production of B and T memory cells during the first exposure to the antigen.
Because of memory cells, a second exposure to an antigen results in an immediate, large-scale production of antibodies and killer T cells.
Because of the presence of the memory cells, the secondary immune response is more rapid, on a larger scale, and lasts longer than the primary immune response.

Existence of the secondary immune response is the basis for vaccination against a number of infectious diseases.
A vaccine is a preparation designed to stimulate the production of memory cells against a pathogenic agent.
In this procedure, the antigen is administered orally or by injection.
Once the antigen is in the body, it provokes a primary immune response, including the production of memory cells.
Often, a second or booster dose is administered to elicit a response that boosts the number of memory cells.
Vaccines can be prepared from killed pathogens or weakened strains that are able to stimulate the immune system but unable to produce symptoms of the disease. 
Recombinant DNA techniques are also used to produce vaccines. 
For example, fragments of the gene coding for the protein coat of the hepatitis B virus are used to produce a noninfectious antigen that is used as a vaccine.

Genetic Diversity in the Immune System

Among vertebrates, each individual can produce millions of different types of antibodies, each responding to a different antigen.
Coincidently, there are millions of different antigen recognition sites on the surface of T cells.
The basis for this molecular diversity lies in the amino acid sequences composing the backbones of these proteins, called T-cell receptors (TCR).
TCRs are encoded by a family of genes, and the rearrangement of these genes in the development of B and T cells is the ultimate basis of their diversity.

The histocompatibility antigens, a third group of proteins involved in the immune response, are also encoded by a family of genes in the HLA complex, but here diversity is achieved by a large number of alleles at each locus in the family, rather than by gene rearrangement.
In the following sections we will examine the molecular basis for diversity in antibodies and TCRs and consider diversity in the HLA complex in a later section.

Antibodies

In humans, antibodies are produced by plasma cells, a type of B cell.
Five classes of antibodies or immunoglobulins (Ig) are recognized: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE (Table 22.2).
The first class, IgG, represents about 80 percent of the antibodies found in the blood and is the most extensively characterized class of antibodies. 
IgG is associated with immunological memory.
The IgA class of immunoglobulins (found in breast milk) can be secreted across plasma membranes and is associated with immunological resistance to infections of the respiratory and digestive tracts. 
IgM antibodies are usually the first secreted by a plasma cell in response to an antigen, and they are associated with the early stages of the immune response.
At this time, little is known about the role of the IgD class of immunoglobulins. 
They are associated with the surface of B cells, and may regulate their action.
IgE antibodies are involved with fighting parasitic infections.
IgE antibodies are also associated with allergic responses.

Table 22.2

Categories and Components of Immunoglobins

Ig Class.
Light Chain.
Heavy Chain.
Tetramers.


IgA.
a.
k2a2.
l2a2.


IgD .
d.
k2d2.
l2d2.


IgE.
e.
k2e2.
l2e2.


IgG.
K or l.
y.
k2y2.
l2y2.


IgM.
m.
k2m2 .
l2m2.


A typical IgG molecule (Figure 22.8) consists of two different polypeptide chains, each present in two copies.
The larger or heavy chain (H) contains approximately 440 amino acids.
The sequence of the first 110 amino acids at the N-terminus differs between different heavy chains, and is known as the variable region (VH) .
The remaining C-terminal amino acids are the same in all H chains, and make up the constant region (CH) .
In humans, the H chains are encoded by genes on the long arm of chromosome 14.

The light chain (L) is composed of 220 amino acids, with the first 110 amino acids making up the variable region (VL) (Figure 22.8).
The rest of the amino acids at the C-terminus make up the constant region (VH) of the light chain.
There are two types of L chains:
kappa chains , encoded by genes on human chromosome 2, and lambda chains , encoded by genes on the long arm of chromosome 22.

Two heavy and two light chains make up a functional IgG molecule, and these are held together by disulfide bonds.
The variable regions of the heavy and light chains form the antibody combining site .
The combining site of each antibody has a unique conformation that allows it to bind to a specific antigen, like a key into a lock.

Figure 22.1

A phagocyte with a cell process that will engulf a rodshaped bacterium in the foreground

Figure 22.2

Stem cells in bone marrow give rise to the precursors of T cells, macrophages, and B cells of the immune system.

Figure 22.3

The pathway of responses in the antibody- mediated immune response

When an infectious agent such as a virus encounters a macrophage, it is ingested and destroyed.
Some of the viral antigens are displayed on the surface of the macrophage and activateT4 cells.
Activated T cells can differentiate into T memory cells or helper T cells.
The helper T cells stimulate B cells in the lymph nodes, which can produce an antibody against the viral antigen to become mitotically active.
The progeny of the activated B cells can differentiate into B memory cells and plasma cells, which produce and secrete large amounts of a single antibody.
The secreted antibody binds to the viral antigen, marking the viral particle for destruction by phagocytes.

Figure 22.4

Transmission electron micrograph of (a) an unactivated B cell, and (b) a plasma cell, derived by activation of a B cell

The enlarged plasma cell is filled with endoplasmic reticulum that synthesizes antibodies.

Figure 22.5

Computer graphic representation of the structure of an antibody

The backbone of the antibody molecule is represented in green, and the antigen- combining site is shown in blue.

Figure 22.6

A large cancer cell, with cellular processes extended, has been detected and surrounded by an array of killer cells

Figure 22.7

A killer cell (at bottom) has attacked a cancer cell and punctured its membrane 

The contents of the tumor cell will leak out through this hole, and the cell will die.
The remaining debris will be scavenged by phagocytes.

Figure 22.8

A typical antibody (immunoglobulin) molecule

The molecule is Y-shaped, and contains four polypeptide chains.
The longer arms are heavy chains, and the shorter arms are the light chains.
Each chain contains a constant region and a variable region.
The variable regions form an antibody combining site that interacts with a specific antigen similar to a lock and key mechanism.
The chains are joined together by disulfide bonds indicated as - .-.- .
