
Recombinant DNA Technology

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Recombinant DNA technology depends in part on the ability to cleave and rejoin DNA segments at specific base sequences.
Using this methodology, individual D.,7VA segments can be transferred to viruses or bacteria and amplified, isolated, and identified.
The use of this technology has brought about significant advances in gene mapping, disease diagnosis, the commercial production of human gene products, and the transfer of genes between species in plants and animals.

The independent rediscovery of Mendel's work by de Vries, Correns, and von Tschermak in 1900 marked the beginning of genetics as an organized discipline.
During the course of the growth and development of this science, several key discoveries have served as turning points, each accelerating the rate at which our knowledge of genetics has grown, and, in turn, opening new fields of investigation.

One of the first of these landmarks was the chromosome theory of inheritance.
This concept, proposed by Sutton and Boveri in 1902, was developed by Morgan and his colleagues using the fruit fly, Drosophila .
From these studies came our understanding of transmission genetics, sex determination, linkage, and the use of polytene chromosomes to map genes to specific cytological loci.

A second landmark was the discovery by Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty that DNA is the macromolecular carrier of genetic information.
This work stimulated the use of viruses and bacteria as organisms for genetic research and led to the Watson-Crick model for the structure of DNA.
From this model has come knowledge of the molecular basis for genetic coding, transcription, translation, and gene regulation.

We are now undergoing another and Perhaps the most profound transition in the history of genetics -the development and application of recombinant DNA technology .
This technology is used in basic research and in the development and production of vaccines, therapeutic proteins, and genetically modified plants and animals.
It has also raised fears about epidemics or widespread ecological changes that might result from the release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment.
This chapter reviews the basic methods of recombinant DNA technology that are used to isolate, replicate, and analyze genes.
In the chapter that follows `e will discuss some of the applications of this technology to agriculture, medicine, and industry.

Recombinant DNA Technology: An Overview 

The term recombinant DNA refers to the creation of a new combination of DNA segments or DNA molecules that are not found together naturally.
Although genetic processes such as crossing over technically pro duce recombinant DNA, the term is generally reserved for DNA molecules produced by joining segments derived from different biological sources. 

Recombinant DNA technology uses techniques derived from the biochemistry of nucleic acids coupled with genetic methodology originally developed for the study of bacteria and viruses.
As described below, the use of recombinant DNA is a powerful tool for the isolation of pure populations of specific DNA sequences from a mixed population of sequences.
The basic procedures involve a series of steps:

1. DNA fragments are generated by using enzymes called restriction endonucleases , enzymes that recognize and cut DNA molecules at specific nucleotide sequences. 
2. The fragments produced by digestion with restriction enzymes are joined to other DNA molecules that serve as vectors .
Vectors can replicate autonomously in host cells and facilitate the manipulation of the newly created recombinant DNA molecule.

3. The recombinant DNA molecule, consisting of a vector carrying an inserted DNA segment, is transferred to a host cell.
Within this cell, the recombinant DNA molecule replicates, producing dozens of identical copies known as clones .

4. As host cells replicate, the recombinant DNA is passed on to all progeny cells, creating a population of identical cells, all carrying the cloned sequence.
5. The cloned DNA segments can be recovered from the host cell, purified, and analyzed.
6. Potentially, the cloned DNA can be transcribed, its mRNA translated, and the gene product isolated and studied. 

Making Recombinant DNA

The development of recombinant DNA techniques affords new opportunities for research, making it easier to obtain large amounts of DNA encoding specific genes and facilitating studies of gene organization, structure, and expression.
This methodology has also given impetus to the development of a burgeoning biotechnology industry that is delivering a growing number of products to the market-place.
Recombinant DNA works by making large numbers of copies of specific DNA segments, including genes.
The process is outlined in the following sections. 

Restriction Enzymes

The cornerstone of recombinant DNA technology is a class of enzymes called restriction endonucleases .
These enzymes, isolated from bacteria, received their name because they restrict or prevent viral infection by degrading the invading nucleic acid.
Restriction enzymes recognize a specific nucleotide sequence (called a restriction site) on a double-stranded DNA molecule, and cut the DNA at that sequence. 
The 1978 Nobel Prize was given to Werner Arber, Hamilton Smith and Daniel Nathans for their work on restriction enzymes. 
To date, almost 200 different types of restriction enzymes have been isolated and characterized.

Restriction enzymes are named for the organism in which they were discovered, using a system of letters and numbers. 
The enzyme EcoRI is from Escherichia coli , and is pronounced "echo-r-one." HindIII was discovered in Hemophilus influenzae and is pronounced "hindee-three." There are two classes of restriction enzymes.
Type I enzymes Cut both strands of the DNA at a random location at some distance from the recognition site. 
Because the cutting site in type I enzymes is not precise, they are not widely used in recombinant DNA research.
Type II enzymes recognize a specific sequence and precisely cut both strands of a DNA molecule within the recognition sequence. 
Because they cut at specific sites, type II enzymes are widely used in recombinant DNA research.

The recognition sequence for type II enzymes are symmetrical. 
The sequence read in the 5'-to-3' direction on one strand is the same as the sequence read in the 5'-to-3'direction on the complementary strand.
Sequences that read the same in both directions are known as palindromes .
The palindromic recognition site and points of cleavage for EcoRI are show in Figure 15.1.

The enzyme EcoRI cuts in a staggered fashion wit7nin the recognition site, leaving single-stranded ends.
These tails, with identical nucleotide sequences, are "sticky" because they can hydrogen-bond to complementary tails of other DNA fragments. 
If DNAs from different sources share the same palindromic recognition sites, both will contain complementary single-stranded tails when treated with a restriction endonuclease (Figure 15.2). 
If the cut fragments are placed together under proper eondition5, the DNA fragments from these two sources can form recombinant molecules by hydrogen bonding of the StiC4' ends. 
The enzyme DNA ligase can be used to covalently link the phosphate-sugar backbones of the two fragments, producing a recombinant DNA molecule (Figure 15.2).

Other Type II restriction enzymes such as SmaI cleave DNA to produce blunt-end fragments (Figure 15.3) DNA fragments with blunt ends can also be joined together to create recombinant molecules, after the DNA has been modified (Figure 15.3).
The enzyme terminal deoxynocleotidyl transferase is used to created single-strancled ends by the addition of nucleotide "tails.
If a poly dA tail is added to DNA fragments from one source, and a poly dT tail is added to DNA from another source, complementary tails are created, and the fragments can hydrogen-bond.
Recombinant molecules can then be created by ligation (Figure 15.3).
Figure 15.4 depicts some common restriction enzymes and their recognition sequences, many of which yield cohesive or "sticky" ends while others generate blunt ends.

Vectors

After being joined with a vector or cloning vehicle, a DNA segment can gain entry into a host cell and be replicated or cloned.
Vectors are, in essence, carrier DNA molecules. 
To serve as a vector, a DNA molecule must have several properties:

1. It must be able to independently replicate itself and the DNA segments it carries.
2. It should contain a number of restriction enzyme cleavage sites that are present only once in the vector.
This site is cleaved with a restriction enzyme and used to insert DNA segments cut with the same enzyme.

3. It should carry a selectable marker (usually in the form of antibiotic resistance genes or genes for enzymes missing in the host cell) to distinguish host cells that carry vectors from host cells that do not contain a vector.
4. It should be easy to recover from the host cell. 

There are three main types of vectors currently in use: plasmids, bacteriophages, and cosmids.

Plasmid Vectors

Plasmids are naturally occurring, extrachromosomal double-stranded DNA molecules that carry an origin of replication site (ori+) and replicate autonomously within bacterial cells (Figure 15.5). 
The genetics of plasmids and their host bacterial cells will be discussed in Chapter 18.
In this section, emphasis will be on the role of plasmids as vectors.
For use in genetic engineering, many plasmids have been modified or engineered to contain a limited number of restriction sites and specific antibiotic resistance genes.

The vector pBR322 was one of the first genetically engineered plasmids to be used in recombinant DNA (Figure 15.6). 
This plasmid carries an origin of replication (ori+), two selectable genes (resistance to the antibiotics ampicillin and tetracycline), and a number of unique sites for restriction cleavage.
Sites for the enzymes BamHI, SphI, SalI, XmaIII, and NruI are within the tetracycline gene, and unique sites for RruI, PvuI, and PstI are within the ampicillin resistance gene. 
If pBR322 is introduced into a plasmid-free, antibiotic-sensitive bacterial cell, the cell will become resistant to both tetracycline and ampicillin.
If a DNA fragment is inserted into the RruI, PvuI, or PstI sites, the ampicillin gene will become inactivated, but the gene for tetracycline resistance will remain active.
If this recombinant plasmid is transferred into a plasmid-free bacterial cell, cells carrying the recombinant plasmid can be identified because they will be resistant to tetracycline and sensitive to ampicillin.

Over the years, more sophisticated plasmid vectors have been developed, offering a number of useful features.
One such plasmid, derived from pBR322, is pUC18 (Figure 15.7), which has the following properties:

1. The plasmid is about half the size of pBR322, allowing larger DNA fragments to be inserted.
2. The pUC18 replicates to produce about 100 copies per cell, 5 to 10 times the number of copies produced by pBR322
3. A large number of unique restriction sites are present in pUC18, and these are clustered in one region, known as a polylinker .
4. The plasmid carries a fragment of a bacterial gene called lacZ, and the polylinker is inserted into this gene fragment.
The normal lacZ gene encodes the enzyme beta-galactosidase, which cleaves sugar molecules.
When pUC18 is inserted into a bacterial host cell that carries a mutant lacZ gene, functional beta-galactosidase is produced.
The presence of functional beta galactosidase in a bacterial colony can be detected by a color test.
Bacterial cells carrying pUC18 form blue colonies when grown on medium containing a compound called X-gal.
If DNA is inserted into the polylinker, the lacZ gene is disrupted, and white colonies form.
White colonies that are resistant to ampicillin contain plasmids carrying DNA inserts (Figure 15.8). 


Lambda and M13 Bacteriophage Vectors

Lambda is a bacteriophage widely used in recombinant DNA work (Figure 15.9).
The genes of lambda have all been identified and mapped, and the nucleotide sequence of the entire genome is known.
The central third of the lambda chromosome is dispensible, and this region can be replaced with foreign DNA without affecting the ability of the phage to infect cells and form plaques (Figure 15.10).
Over 100 vectors based on lambda phages have been developed by removing various portions of the central gene cluster.
To clone using the lambda vector, the phage DNA is cut with a restriction enzyme -for example, EcoRI- resulting in a left arm, a right arm, and the central region.
The arms are isolated and ligated (using DNA ligase) to DNA segments generated by cutting genomic DNA with EcoRI. 

The resulting recombinant molecules can be introduced into bacterial host cells by transfection .
First, the host cells are made permeable by a chemical treatment, and then mixed with the ligated molecules.
Vector molecules carrying inserts are taken into the host cells, where they direct the synthesis of infective phage, each of which carries a DNA insert.
Alternatively, the lambda DNA carrying inserts can be mixed with phage protein components; from this mixture, infective phage particles are formed.
Each phage can be amplified by growth on plated bacterial cells to form plaques or by infecting cells in liquid medium and harvesting the lysed cells.

Other bacteriophages are used as vectors, including the single-stranded phage known as M13 (Figure l5.11).
When M13 infects a bacterial cell, the single strand (+ strand) replicates to produce a double-stranded molecule known as the replicative form (RF).
RF molecules can be regarded as similar to plasmids, and foreign DNA can be inserted into single restriction enzyme cleavage sites present in the phage DNA.
When reinserted into bacterial cells, the RF molecules replicate to produce single (+) strands, including one strand of the inserted DNA.
The cloned single-tranded DNA produced by M13 are extruded from the cell and can be recovered and used directly for DNA sequencing or as a template for mutational alteration of the cloned sequence.

Cosmid Vectors and Shuttle Vectors 

Cosmids are hybrid vectors constructed using parts of the lambda chromosome and plasmid DNA.
Cosmids contain the cos sequence of phage lambda, necessary for packing phage DNA into the phage protein coats, and plasmid sequences for replication and an antibiotic resistance gene to identify host cells carrying cosmids (Figure 15.12).
Cosmid DNA containing DNA inserts is packaged into lambda protein heads to form infective phage particles.
After the cosmid enters the bacterial host cell, it replicates as a plasmid.
Because almost the entire lambda genome has been deleted, cosmids can carry DNA inserts that are much larger than those carried by lambda vectors.
Cosmids can carry almost 50 kb of insert DNA; phage vectors can accommodate DNA inserts of about 15 kb; plasmids are usually limited to inserts of 5 to 10 kb in length.

Other hybrid vectors constructed with origins of replication derived from different sources (e.g., plasmids and animal viruses such as SV40) can replicate in more than one type of host cell. 
These shuttle vectors usually contain genetic markers that are selectable in both host systems, and can be used to shuttle DNA inserts back and forth between E.,coli and another host cell, such as yeast.

Often, such vectors are employed in studying gene expression. 
Other vectors, those used in specific applications, will be described in following sections.

Figure 0

A sample tube containing a pellet of DNA

Figure 15.1

The restriction enzyme EcoRI recognizes and binds to the palindromic nucleotide sequence GAATTC

Cleavage of the DNA at this site produces complementary single-stranded tails.
The resulting single-stranded tails can anneal with complementary tails from other DNA fragments to form recombinant DNA molecules.

Figure 15.2

In forming recombinant DNA molecules, DNA from different sources is cleaved with EcoRI and mixed together to allow annealing into recombinant molecules 

The enzyme DNA ligase in then used to covalently bond these annealed fragments into an intact recombinant DNA molecule.

Figure 15.3

Recombinant DNA molecules can be formed from DNA cut with enzymes that leave blunt ends

In this method, the enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase is used to create complementary tails by the addition of poly dA and poly dT to the cut fragments.
These tails serve to anneal DNA from different sources and to create recombinant DNA molecules that are covalently linked by treatment with DNA ligase.

Figure 15.4

Some common restriction enzymes, with their recognition and cutting sites, cleavage patterns, and sources

Figure 15.5

A color-enhanced electron micrograph of circular plasmid molecules isolated from the bacterium E., coli 

Genetically engineered plasmids are used as vectors for cloning DNA segments.

Figure 15.6

Restriction map of the plasmid pBR322 showing the locations of the restriction enzyme sites that cleave the plasmid only once

These sites can be used to insert DNA fragments for cloning.
Also shown are the locations of the genes for antiblotic resistance.

Figure 15.7

The plasmid pUC18 offers several advantages as a vector for cloning

Because of its small size, it can accept relatively large DNA fragments for cloning; it replicates to a high copy number, and it has a large number of restriction sites within the polylinker, located within a lacZ gene.
Bacteria carrying pUC18 produce blue colonies when grown on a medium containing X-gal DNA inserted into the polylinker site disrupts the lacZ gene, resulting in white colonies, allowing direct identification of colonies carrying cloned DNA inserts.

Figure 15.8

Petri plate showing the growth of host cells after uptake of recombinant plasmids

The medium on the plate contains a compound called X-gol.
DNA inserts in the pUC vector disrupt the gene responsible for the formation of blue colonies.
Cells in blue colonies do not carry any cloned DNA inserts, whereas white colonies contain vectors carrying DNA inserts.

Figure 15.9

A colorized electron micrograph showing a cluster of the bacteriophage lambda widely used as a vector in recombinant DNA work

Figure 15.10

Steps in cloning phage lambda as a vector.

DNA is extracted from a preparation of lambda phage, and the central gene cluster is removed by treatment with a restriction enzyme

The DNA to be cloned is cut with the same enzyme and ligated into the arms of the lambda chromosome.
The recombinant chromosome is then packaged into phage proteins to form a recombinant virus.
This virus is able to infect bacterial cells and replicate its chromosome, including the DNA insert.

Figure 15.11

M13 bacteriophage are long thin filaments containing a single strand of DNA

They enter the E., coli cells that carry long thin filaments (thicker than M 13) called F pili and do so by attaching to the end of the F pilus.

Figure 15.12

The cosmid pJB8 contains a bacterial origin of replication (ori), a singie cos site (cos), an ampicillin resistance gene (amp, for selection of colonies that have taken up the cosmid), and a region containing four restriction sites for cloning (BamHI, EcoRI, ClaI. and HindIII) 

Because the vector is small (5.4 kb long), it can accept foreign DNA segments between 33 and 46 kb in length. 
The cos site allows cosmids carrying large inserts to be packaged into lambda viral coat proteins as though they were viral chromosomes.
The viral coats carrying the cosmid can be used to infect a suitable bacterial host, and the vector, carrying a DNA insert, will k transferred into the host cell. 
Once inside, the ori sequence allows the cosmid to replicate as a bacterial plasmid.
