
LEBER HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY AS A MODEL OF MITOCHONDRIAL DISEASE

INTRODUCTION

In the evolution of Genetics as a science there have been developed various initial precepts that had to be posteriorly modified or enlarged with the coming of new knowledges.

Thus for example the classical mendelian inheritance, that was supporting theoretical base of transmission of hereditary characters during several years, was not enough for explaining numerous heredopathies that began to appear.

There is a particular group within the inherited pathologies that is characterized by its maternal heritage, that means that although the affected patients can be of both sexes, it is always the mother who transmits the characters and none affected male do it.
This fact is due to the presence in the maternal ovule of a great number of mitochondrias with mitochondrial DNA. 
The spermatozoid on the other hand has a small number of this organelles that don't get to the cytoplasm of the zygote. 
So, the information coming from the DNA of the mother's mitochondrias is the one that is expressed in the ndividual. 
In these circumstances the segregation laws that were stated and are in effect two centuries ago do not explain an adequate mechanism .

Since 1993 it was known about the existence of DNA inside the mitochondria, however it is not till the 70th decade that in " the other human genome" it began to be considered as possible responsible of human genetic diseases that would have a maternal inheritance pattern.

A great variety of degenerative diseases, which involve cerebellum, heart, muscles, kidney, endocrine glands, peripheral nervous system, and others, are the result of mitochondrial DNA mutations (DNAmit).
The first mutation of these DNAmt. was discovered in 1988 by Wallace and his working team and it precisely produces a Lever phenotype.
Subsequent pathogenic mutations that were described in this DNAmt. is associated to rare syndromes as MELAS ( Mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes ), MERRF( Myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red fibres ), Kearns- Sayre, and others.

The Lever Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) was described for the first time in 1858 by Von Graefe and it was named that way in reconnaissance to Theodore Leber because of his investigation which was published in the Ophthalmology Von Graefe archives in 1871 with a detailed description of the disease.

This disease is essentially characterized by its early beginning, in the second- third decade of life in an optic sub-acute neuropathy way, with grave and rapid loss of vision associated to cecocentral scotoma in both eyes, having particularities that obey to its mitochondrial production mechanism. 

In our country there are antecedents about the study of LHON , which together with the interesting peculiarities of this entity motivated us to carry out this review.

Mitochondrial Pathologies

The mitochondrial pathologies constitute a diverse group of disorders produced by genetic, structural, and biochemical disorders of the mitochondria.
Due to the fact that the mitochondrial dysfunction can virtually affect all the organs, the specialists of diverse branches get in touch with these entities. 

The knowledge of the mitochondrial DNA (DNAmit.) role in some diseases has rapidly evolved since 1988, when there were discovered its first mutations.

They were subsequently identified in a variety of diseases and the pathogenic role of the DNAmit accumulative damage has been explored in many common diseases that are developed in late stages of life or in the growth process.

The DNAmit mutations are divided into two groups, bases substitution, and deletion-insertion of them.
These mutations produce alterations in the genic product because of a change of amino acids (a.a) that affect the codified protein by a sequence of this DNAmit or alterations in the synthesis of the proteins for injuring the ARNt or ARNr.

From the deletions it was reported that none of them hinder the origins of the replication of both chains.
The insertions can cause duplication of various regions of the DNAmit. .

Structure and function of the DNAmit

To understand the mitochondrial disease it is essential to examine the general traits of the DNAmit.
The mitochondria generates energy for the cell by means of the ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation.
This organelle has its own DNA known as "the other human genome", it is of double chain, is circular, and codifies for 13 protein subunits of 4 biochemical complexes and for 24 ARN (the ribosomal xxx and xxx , and 22 of transference), that are required for the intramitochondrial transfer of codification units of proteins.

This molecule has 16 569 base pairs and its genome is completely mapped.
In all the genes of this DNA there have been found mutations.

The mitochondria, that was probably developed as an organelle from independent organisms that became part of the cell, is able of replicating, transcribing and translating its DNA independently from the nuclear DNA, however the nuclear and the mitochondrial function are interdependent.
The nuclear DNA codifies for protein subunits of oxidative phosphorylation and for a lot of macromolecular components that are required in the mitochondrial structure and function.
The codified proteins and the ARNm that comes from the nucleus must be imported to the mitochondria. 
On the other hand, during phosphorylation, the energy of the cell (ATP) is obtained by means of an electrochemical gradient;
this process depends on the mitochondrial ARNt that is codified by the DNAmit. .

There are various traits of the DNAmit that can be related to its frequent association with mutations and diseases.
The DNAmit mutates 10 times easier than the nuclear and doesn't has introns, so a mutation at random frequently harms a codification sequence.

Additionally, this molecule doesn't has effective reparation mechanisms, nor protector histonas and it is exposed to free radicals of oxygen that are freed by the phosphorylation.

The DNAmit. is inherited by maternal way and do not recombine. 
Here the mutation is sequentially accumulated by means of maternal lines.
Each mitochondria has from 2 to 10 DNA and each cell has multiple mitochondrias.
So in a cell can coexist normal and mutant mitochondrias.
This condition is called Heteroplasmy and allow a mutation to persist which there would be lethal otherwise.
On the other hand, Homoplasmy is the total presence of normal or mutated DNAmit. 

Through the replicate segregation process, the proportions of mutant and normal molecules can be changed when segregating them to the daughter cells.
Thus, more than the Mendel laws are the population genetical laws the ones that govern the DNAmit. .

The proportion of the mutant DNAmit. required for the occurrence of a deletereo phenotype is submitted to the" threshold effect ", which varies among people, organ systems and even among tissues. 
This effect depends on the delicate balance between the oxidative supply and its demand.

Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON)

The inheritance of the LHON is mitochondrial.
Leber recognized the two unusual findings of the disease pattern, the maternal transmission and the tendency to affect males.
Imai and Mariwceki suggested in 1936 the citoplasmatic inheritance and Erikson in 1972 suggested a possible mutation of DNAmit.
In 1988 Wallace and collaborators identified a mutation in the pair of bases 11778 of the DNAmit.
That is exclusive of families with LHON.

Subsequently there have been reported various new mutations. 
The prevalence of the disease is approximate to 1 in 50,000, acting in a similar way to the Dominant Optic Atrophy (type Kjer).

The evaluation of the pathogenicity of the DNAmit that is mutated in LHON is very important to determine the degree of affection that produces each mutation.

All the mutations identified as cause of the disease are punctual and they are detected by amplification of the relevant region of the DNAmit. and digestion with endonucleasas for which mutations cause loss or profits of a cutting site.

Pathogenicity criteria of mutations in LHON 

In 1995 Riordan-Eva and Harding enunciated the following criteria applied to establish pathogenicity of an individual mutation:

- To identify the mutation in a number of families known of LHON, preferably of independent origin with big pedigrees and well documented, showing a clear pattern of maternal transmission. 

- To identify the mutation exclusively in affected families and not in healthy or control individuals, or with another type of optic neuropathy

- The mutation must not coexist with another pathogenic mutations

- The mutation must be heteroplasmic in some persons of the affected families, since heteroplasmy doesn't seem to be a finding of innocuous polymorphisms.

- The mutation must change a residue of highly conserved a.a.


These criteria are not absolute, but whereas more of them are fulfilled, there will be more certainty of pathogenicity of the mutation that is studied.

From all the previously exposed arise the Primary, Secondary and Intermediate mutation concepts for LHON.

The Primary mutations are those that are only identified in families with the disease, never in control individuals.
There are numerous primary mutations in this entity.
The causal role of Wallace mutation (A1178G), that is the most common in the families that were studied in Europe, USA, Japan, and Australia, was originally established by the identification of the mutation in two different pedigrees, a black family in the USA and a white family in Europe.

The mutation was not observed in the controls and it was heteroplasmic for hundred of individuals.
The result was a substitution of an argynine highly conserved by histydine in the NDH4 (Complex I of deshydrogenasa NDA) in the respiratory chain.
Since argynine and histydine are both basic the change is relatively conservative.

Other Primary mutations are: 3460, 14484, 4160, 4136, and 5244, all of them with changes in the polypeptide a.a of the Complex I. The 9438 and 9804 affect the subunit III of the cytochrome C.
Approximately the 90 % of Leber's patients that have been studied in the world have the mutations 11778, 3460, or 14484. 

The Secondary mutations include a numerous group of mutations identified in the families LHON and in control families, but with more frequency in the first ones.

These mutations find association with another secondary or with primaries, being difficult to accede to their meaning in the disease production.
They are: 3394, 4136, 4216, 4917, 5244, 13708, 7444, 15812.
It has been suggested that in the lack of a primary of the three mayor mutations (11778, 3460, 14484), the LHON only occur if there are multiple secondary mutations or a primary from the other mutations associated to these ones, then the secondary ones would affect the manifestations of the disease.

An Intermediate mutation is the 15257 that substitutes by asparagine the aspartic highly conserved in apocytochrome of Complex III, frequently associated to 13708 or 14484.
It receives its name from the fact that in diverse studies it is associated to any of the three mayor primaries but it doesn't has described any influence in the clinical findings of the LHON of the patients.

Recently there have been discovered new mutations as for example one that act upon the gene of the mitochondrial subunit ND5, it is located in the position 13513 and it is probably pathogenic producing an overlapped phenotype between a history of LHON an one of MELAS.
Some of them would be related with Parkinson disease and others produce isolated classical history.

Distribution by sexes of LHON

The heteroplasmy has been implicated as the base of the incomplete penetrance in LHON (50% in males and 90% in women with heteroplasmy to primary mutations).

An interesting element is the male predominance in LHON. 
It still remains unexplained if there is a theory of "susceptibility gene of visual loss ligated to X " but it is controversial and in many cases it has been refuted when analyzing the datums.

What it has been demonstrated by many authors is that there are differences between men and women as to the clinical development of the disease.
It is stated a better recuperation rate for men, with a minor average age of beginning for women and the presence in most of them of their affected mother.
However, if the beginning age is early (first or second decade of life), with independence of the sex the recuperation prognostic is worst .

Classical clinical history

In the classical clinical history the mayor symptom is the acute loss of central vision, bilateral.
There is a great variety of findings associated or not.

Classically the disease occur like "thunder in clear sky", without prodromes, though can occur migraine in the 33% of the patients.
The loss of central vision is initially monocular, painless, and it is developed in few hours or days.
The patient describes blurred vision with the day light which gets better with the sunset, but the adaptation curve to darkness is subnormal.
There could be transitory blurred vision with physical exercise or with heat (Uhtroff sign).

There are also described unspecific lightening of lights and colors.
The colors vision is severely affected in the early course of the disease with axial dyschromatopsy acquired to he red and the green.

The Eyes Fundus (E/F) discovers a hyperhemic disk of irregular edges and inflammation of the underlined nervous fiber.
There is no fluoresceine leaking in the head of the nervous but there is telangectasic circumpapillar microangiopathy, with irregular dilatation of the pre and peripapillar capillars.
The big vessels are tortuous.
There is great variability to the E/F that oscillates from normality (42%) to florida neuroretinitis with disk hemorrhage.

In an interval from weeks to months ( xxx ) happen the same with the other eye.

It is not frequent for the interval to get longer (reported up to 8 years) and it is less frequent that it persists monocular. 

The visual field tests typically demonstrate a great central scotoma, reflecting preferential inclusion of the maculopapillar packet.

The loss of vision is permanent.
The atrophy doesn't affect the cupula, it will develop beginning by the temporal field with gradual worsening of the visual acuteness (V.A) in the following months.
The final result is variable, but the stability of the visual function persist.
However, in some cases there is spontaneous recuperation although incomplete, uni or bilateral.
The molecular analysis suggests a relation between the specific mitochondrial mutation and the visual recuperation. 
The 14484 has better prognostic in the recuperation rate with a V.A of 20/60 in both eyes in the 37% of the cases.
The mutation 3460 has a variable rate but it reaches the 22% of the recuperated patients in some degree.
The 11778 is the one of the worst prognostic, only a 5% of recuperation. 

The improvement is always more probable if the loss of vision doesn't occur in early ages.
The time between the beginning and the end of the recuperation is variable, it can be of 10 or more years, being very rare a relapse.

Independently from the association between some mutations and the recuperation rate of the Visual Acuteness (V.A), it was stated that the last one follows the clinical course of the disease without any evident signs that any therapeutic can propitiate its occurrence in less time.

In terms of distribution in the population typically there are affected young men between 15 - 35 years of age.
The average age of the beginning in men is of 25-34 and in women of 23 - 26 with variable ranks.

LLeber plus síndrom

There are some diseases that have been frequently associated to LHON.
From this fact comes the Leber plus Syndrome denomination.

Associated diseases

- Of Neurological type:
Multiple Sclerosis, Subacute infantile encephalopathy, tremor, disartria, ataxia, signs of posterior medullar cordon and spasticity.
Non well defined etiology.

- Of cardiac type:
Preexcitation syndrome (Long-Ganong-Levine), prolonged Q-T interval, combination of deep Q with high T and others.


Genetic counseling

The genetical counseling (GC) in LHON is not exact, the same as the transmission of a mutation which is not always associated to the transmission of a disease.

This phenomenon is common to all the entities with mutations of the mitochondrial DNA.

Although the heteroplasmy can be a determinant factor in the penetrance of a disease, many patients and their non affected relatives in Leber's families have very high quantities of mutant DNAmit. ( xxx ) and many males with risk remain non affected in this context.

Because of this reason the analysis of the DNAmit. in relatives of risk is not very useful, particularly in young males.

The heteroplasmy finding in a relevant mutation always provokes familiar anxiety.
This is particularly applicable to have children, and it is also a situation difficult to manage from the ethical point of view so it must be analyzed carefully. 

Although it is possible that some affected males present new mutations, which is suggested by the absence of mutation in the mother and other relatives of this line, that has only been described for a recent mutation (13730) which has uncertain pathogenic meaning.

There haven't been still published any data with the occurrence risk in LHON patients genetically defined and it is not clear how they can vary according to the mutation.
But there are preliminary analysis of 87 pedigrees with the mutations 11778, 3460 and 14484 for the disease that were taken from the National Hospital of Neurology and Neurosurgery at London that suggest the following risks:

- Brothers 34%
- Sisters 14%
- Nephews 42%
- Nieces 9%
- First cousins 40%
- First cousin 2%

These risks can be modified taking the penetrance in relation with the average age of beginning.
For the three most important mutations is of approximately 20 years for males and 28 for females.

Multiple studies for other mutations (14484) also show a big difference in the recurrence risk between males and females of different relationship degrees.

The previously referred difficulties about the use of DNAmit. molecular analysis in risk relatives, have also appliance in the molecular prenatal diagnostic.
Due to the fact that it is not known the proportion of mutant DNAmit. in chorionic vellous that reduces the genetic risk, or how this proportion can change during the pre and post natal development, the only option in women carrier of this altered DNAmit. that desire to avoid a high risk pregnancy is the abortion of male fetuses.
However, their daughters have also high risk of being affected, that is to say that up to the moment it is not possible the control of a normal pregnancy to guarantee that do not exist this kind of problem in the descent.
In an alternative way there could be used techniques of assisted reproduction, but we are dealing with a field that hasn't been still explored in these entities.

LHON and life stiles and habits

The existence in the patients with the entity of toxic noxious habits as alcoholism and the smoking habit have propitiated epidemiological studies in this sense.
It is suggested that even if these habits are not present in many of the cases in the disease debut because of its early occurrence and they can't be consequently associated with the occurrence age, it is statistically significant their association with other variables like the progressive worsening of the symptoms and the non-regression of them.
The biologically plausible explanation is that for the consumption of these toxics there are produced substances called exogenous toxins that are able of moving forward and getting worse the clinical course of numerous mitochondrial diseases because of the overload of the mitochondria function.

The diet of the patients is another of the topics of difficult valorization due to its heterogeneity in the diverse geographic zones that were studied, however, there is a consensus that the foodstuffs rich thyocianates must be avoid in excess and to complement the alimentation with a vitamin supplement that includes the ubiquinone (Q coenzyme); what theoretically must improve the progression of the symptoms.
Nevertheless, since we are dealing with a topic little explored there are detractors of the utility of this last therapy.

Molecular analisis

With respect to the molecular analysis properly said many techniques have been used to study DNAmit. mutations and we have among them: PCR, Southern blotting and cloning.
In particular for the LHON where the mutations that are presented are punctual, with better predominance of the transitions than transvertions, the procedures more used in the routine testing for the diagnostic is the amplification by means of chain reaction of polymerase (CRP) and digestion with specific restriction enzymes that create a new site or a site already in existence for the enzyme in the presence of a mutation disappear.
The results get visualized with a DNA electrophoresis.

It calls the attention a specific situation with respect to the healthy individuals of families with LHON in which the molecular studies bring forth homoplasmy to the mutated DNAmit. without the most slight vestige of healthy DNAmit independently from the type of study that was applied.
To corroborate the result it has been used the heteroplasmy quantification using the SSCP(single strand conformation polymorphism analysis) or a Southern Blot post PCR or even methods of radioactive scoring that sensitize the technique.

In consequence, this result of heteroplasmy absence in peripheral blood in sufficiently high levels for being detectable, it is not explained by the test sensitivity, especially if we take into account the uniformity of multiple results in this sense.
According to some molecular biologists data that work in this investigative line this is a common and non-explained phenomenon that is presented for example in all the families studied in Canada to the mutation 14484 in which was used initially a routine procedure and later there were used others more specific from the ones already referred.

There have been proposed numerous hypothesis that try to explain this finding but the most accepted are based on two different mechanisms.
In one of them it is stated the genetic segregation at random which takes place during the early ovogenesis that propitiate the occurrence of homoplasmic lines in the descent of heteroplasmic progenitors making this phenomenon common.
In the second one it was stated the finding of a negative selection against cells of peripheral blood mutated in their DNAmit. in the position 3460 that propitiated the gradual diminishment of the heteroplasmy rate to this level in a study of six years. 
We can't affirm that in such patients have occurred a negative selection against blood cell non mutated in their DNAmit, which would be little probable, but it would be of benefit in future investigations to count with samples of other tissues from the patient, like hair, skin, mucosas, fluids as saliva and urine or even post mortem samples of tissues from the optic nervous that when being studied together they give a complete information about the heteroplasmy behavior in these families. 
Such samples in their study would give elements that would clear in the LHNO a finding verified in other entities like MERRF, MELAS, Kearns Sayre in which it's stated a specific selection of tissues as a modulator element in the pathogenesis of DNAmit mutations.
