
Disarming Flu Viruses

Coming soon: new medicines designed to treat the flu by halting viral replication in human tissues The drugs may also serve as a novel kind of preventive.

Every so often, a strain of influenza unfamiliar in humans suddenly begins passing from person to person.
Because the virus is so unusual, few if any people have built-in immunity from past exposures.
Even the vaccinated have no defense; flu shots shield against influenza variants that health experts have anticipated will be active in a given flu season, not against other, unforeseen kinds.
Finding no deterrent, the new strain spreads unabated, causing illness--and death--on a global scale.

The worst worldwide epidemic, or pandemic, on record struck in 1918 and killed more than 20 million people, sometimes within hours after the first symptoms appeared.
This disaster, traced to the so-called Spanish influenza virus, was followed by epidemics of Asian flu in 1957, Hong Kong flu in 1968 and Russian flu in 1977. (The names reflect popular impressions of where the pandemics began, although all four episodes, and perhaps most others, are now thought to have originated in China.) Public health experts warn that another pandemic can strike any time now and that it could well be as vicious as the 1918 episode. 
In 1997, when a lethal influenza variant afflicted 18 people in Hong Kong, contributing to the death of six, officials feared the next wave had begun.
Authorities in the region managed to contain the problem quickly, however, by finding the source--infected chickens, ducks and geese--and then destroying all the poultry in Hong Kong.

Next time, humankind may not be so fortunate.
If a virus as deadly as that Hong Kong strain tore through the world's crowded communities today, 30 percent of the earth's population could conceivably be dead (from the virus itself or from secondary bacterial infections) before a vaccine became available to protect those who initially managed to escape infection.
Vaccines against any given influenza variant take about six months to produce, test for safety and distribute--too long to do much good in the face of a fast-moving pandemic.

If the feared pandemic does not materialize until next year or beyond, though, new methods for limiting sickness and death could be available.
Later this year two drugs being tested in large clinical trials could be approved for sale as new missiles in the fight against the flu.
The agents--called zanamivir (Relenza) and GS 4104--show great promise for preventing influenza infections and for reducing the duration and severity of symptoms in people who begin treatment after they start to feel sick.

Unlike vaccines (which prime the immune system to prevent viruses from gaining a foothold in the body) and unlike standard toc remedies (which ease symptoms but have no effect on the infection itself), these drugs have been designed to attack the influenza virus directly.
They hobble a critical viral enzyme, called neuraminidase, and in so doing markedly reduce proliferation of the virus in the body.
Additional neuraminidase inhibitors, not yet evaluated in humans, are under study as well [see illustration]. 

As many people know, two anti-flu drugs, amantadine and rimantadine, are already on the market.
But those agents, which work by a different mechanism, have serious flaws.
They can cause confusion and other neurological side effects, and they are ineffective against one of the two major influenza classes (type B) that afflict people.
Moreover, influenza viruses seem to become resistant to the drugs fairly easily. 
Therefore, individuals treated in the first phases of an epidemic can spread a drug-resistant version of the virus to other people, who will then prove unresponsive to the medicines. 
This last problem is particularly acute in "closed" communities, such as nursing tocs.

The story of how the newer drugs were developed involves a wonderful combination of luck and logic.
The breakthrough that led most immediately to their design was the deciphering, in 1983, of neuraminidase's three-dimensional structure.
Yet it was a series of earlier discoveries that enabled scientists to realize that a specific part of the neuraminidase molecule was probably an Achilles' heel for all influenza variants--a weakness that thoughtfully constructed drugs might exploit.

Understanding a Scourge

One line of that early research uncovered some essential properties of influenza viruses and of their strategy for survival. 
Biologists have long known that viruses are basically genes wrapped in proteins that either protect the genes or help the viruses to reproduce in the body.
Sometimes, as is true for influenza, these various constituents are further enveloped in a fatty (lipid) membrane.
When any virus causes disease, it does so by invading selected cell types, replicating within those cells and then pouring out of the cells to infect others [see illustration].
Symptoms arise both because viral proliferation disrupts the colonized cells and because the immune system attempts to contain the infection, in the process causing local inflammation and systemic aches and fever.

Influenza strains that colonize humans have a particular affinity for the epithelial cells that form the lining of the respiratory tract.
Successful infection typically leads after a day or two to such classic symptoms as runny or stuffy nose, dry cough, chills, fever, aches, deep tiredness and loss of appetite.
Historical descriptions based on symptoms indicate that flu epidemics have probably plagued human populations since well before the 5th century B.C. Scientists isolated an influenza strain from a human for the first time in 1933.
Since then, they have learned that influenza viruses come in two main "flavors"--types A and B--that differ in certain of their internal proteins.
A third type (C) does not seem to cause serious disease.

Virologists further group type A forms according to variations in two proteins that protrude from the viral surface like spikes--hemagglutinin and neuraminidase (the enzyme that is the target of the new drugs). 
As is true of other proteins, these consist of folded strings of amino acids.
All hemagglutinin variants adopt essentially the same three-dimensional conformation, and all neuraminidase variants take on a characteristic shape.
But within each group, the individual proteins can differ markedly in the sequence of their constituent amino acids.
So far 15 hemagglutinin and nine neuraminidase subtypes have been identified on type A influenzas, which are named according to the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase molecules they display: H1N1, H1N2, H2N2 and so on.

Type B viruses are a more uniform lot.
They carry one form of hemagglutinin and one of neuraminidase, although the amino acid sequences can differ slightly from one B strain to another.
Similarly, each influenza A subtype can also come in slightly varying strains.

Aside from their chemistry, type A and type B influenzas differ in their range of activity.
Type B viruses infect only humans, and they cause regional epidemics rather than pandemics. 
Type A influenzas, in contrast, affect pigs, horses, seals, whales and birds as well as humans, although not all strains infect all species. (Indeed, only four subtypes have been found in humans.) They are also responsible for all of this century's pandemics.

In spite of their differences, both influenza types have the same basic life cycle [see illustration].
For a single copy of an influenza virus, or particle, to enter a human cell, hemagglutinin on the virus must link to a sugary molecule, sialic acid, on the surface of the cell.
This binding induces the cell to engulf the virus, which is initially sequestered within a kind of bubble.
Soon, though, the viral genes (consisting of strands of RNA) and internal proteins are freed, and they work their way into the cell nucleus.

There some of the viral proteins set about replicating the viral RNA strands and also constructing a form (called messenger RNA) that can be read out and translated into proteins by the cell's protein-making machinery.
Eventually the newly made genes and proteins come together and bud from the cell as new viral particles.

Inconveniently for the virus, the emerging particles are coated with sialic acid, the very substance that binds influenza viruses to the cells they attempt to invade.
If the sialic acid were allowed to remain on the virus and on the surface of a virus-making cell, hemagglutinin on the newly minted particles would bind to the sialic acid, causing the particles to clump together on the cell, like insects trapped on flypaper.
So trapped, they would be unable to spread to other cells.

But the virus has an ace in the hole.
The neuraminidase molecules on the freshly made particles can cleave sialic acid. 
In other words, the neuraminidase spikes essentially dissolve the unwanted sialic acid "glue," thereby enabling the viral particles to travel.
The enzyme also helps the virus to plow through the mucus between cells in the airways.

By the 1960s, investigators were well aware that a drug able to block any step in the replication process might prevent the virus from causing disease or might curtail an existing infection. 
But no one knew precisely how to intervene.
Moreover, biologists realized that because influenza viruses grow inside cells and make use of the cells' own protein-making machinery, most agents able to destroy the virus would also disturb healthy cells.

As workers confronted this difficulty, they also continued trying to understand why some strains of influenza produce localized epidemics but others cause full-fledged pandemics.
This research would eventually reveal that to be most useful, an influenza drug would have to be able to attack all influenza variants, including ones not known to cause disease in humans.

An influenza strain can produce a local or global epidemic only if the people exposed to the virus lack adequate immunity to it.
For instance, when someone has the flu, the immune system produces molecules known as antibodies that recognize specific segments of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase on the viral surface.
If the person is later reexposed to the same strain, these antibodies (primarily those directed at hemagglutinin) bind promptly to the virus and prevent it from causing a repeat infection.

If the virus never changed, as is the case with measles or mumps, the antibodies raised during infection or by a vaccine could provide durable immunity.
But influenza viruses revise themselves all the time.
In consequence, antibodies elicited in one year may well be less effective or useless if they encounter a differing form of the virus in the next flu season.
The extent of change largely determines whether an epidemic becomes relatively contained or extends across the globe unchallenged.

One way influenza viruses change is by antigenic "drift," gradual revision of the amino acid sequence in a protein (antigen) able to elicit an immune response.
These alterations arise through small mutations in the gene that constitutes the blueprint for that protein.
Sometimes a mutation makes little difference in the protein's stability or activity.
Sometimes it damages the protein and reduces the viability of the virus.
Other times, though, it enhances survival, such as by reconfiguring a site on hemagglutinin that was formerly recognized by an antibody. 

When the hemagglutinin or neuraminidase genes and proteins accumulate several alterations, they can become virtually unrecognizable to most of the antibodies in a population and may initiate a new epidemic.
The epidemic finds boundaries, however, when it reaches groups whose immune systems have already "seen" many of the alterations before.

Influenza B viruses seem to change exclusively through such antigenic drift, evolving gradually in their human hosts as they attempt to become less recognizable to the immune repertoire of a population.
Influenza A strains, in contrast, can additionally undergo a more dramatic change, known as antigenic "shift," that enables them, alone, to cause pandemics.

When antigenic shift occurs, strains crop up bearing a totally new hemagglutinin spike, and sometimes also a new neuraminidase molecule, that most people have never encountered.
As a result the virus may evade the antibody repertoire carried by all populations around the globe and trigger a pandemic.
In today's jet- linked world, people can spread a dangerous new virus from one part of the earth to another in a day.

Such a drastic metamorphosis cannot occur through simple genetic mutation.
The best-studied process leading to antigenic shift involves the mixing of two viral strains in one host cell, so that the genes packaged in new viral particles (and their corresponding proteins) come partly from one strain and partly from the other.
This reassortment can take place because the genome, or genetic complement, of the influenza virus consists of eight discrete strands of RNA (each of which codes for one or two proteins).
These strands are easily mixed and matched when new influenza A particles form in a dually infected cell.
For instance, some influenza viruses infect both people and pigs.
If a pig were somehow invaded by a human virus and by a strain that typically infected only birds, the pig might end up producing a hybrid strain that was like the human virus in every way except for displaying, say, a hemagglutinin molecule from the bird virus.

Scientists have recently learned that antigenic shift can also occur in a second way.
In this case, an animal influenza virus that has not previously been able to produce infections in people makes a direct leap into human beings.

No one knows which form of antigenic shift led to the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918, which was caused by the H1N1 subtype of influenza A.
Reassortment has, however, been proved to account for the 1957 Asian flu and 1968 Hong Kong flu pandemics, which were triggered, respectively, by H2N2 and H3N2.
Some work suggests that aquatic birds might have contributed the unfamiliar genes and that pigs probably served as the mixing vessels.
If pigs do sometimes serve this function, their involvement might help to explain why pandemics commonly originate in China: millions of birds, pigs and people live closely there.

The virus that killed six people in Hong Kong in 1997 ( H5N1), in contrast, was not a reassortment virus. 
It caused human disease after jumping directly from birds to people--a phenomenon that had never been seen before.
H5N1 was unable to pass from human to human.
Had it been given time to acquire transmissibility through mutation or reassortment, though, it might have become uncontrollable quickly.

The close call of 1997 has now convinced many public health experts that influenza cases need to be monitored not only in people (as is done now) but also in animals.
Those animals should certainly include migratory birds, because they probably serve as a year-round reservoir of influenza A viruses that then spread to domestic birds and other species.
Prompt identification of animal strains with potential for harming people could help avert a public health disaster.

The incident in Hong Kong has also lent new urgency to research into the nature of the so-called species barrier that prevents many influenza strains from crossing from one kind of animal to another.
If the barrier were better understood, scientists might be able to seal the leaks that now allow certain animal strains to breach the barrier and cause human disease. 

Eureka

Taken together, studies of influenza biology conducted before the early 1980s indicated that, in addition to blocking the activity of some molecule involved in the virus's reproductive cycle, an ideal anti-flu drug would do so by acting at a "conserved" site on the targeted molecule.
That is, it would toc in on an area formed from amino acids that are held constant across all strains of the virus.
A drug that targeted a conserved region would presumably work against any influenza virus that turned up in people, including ones that spread abruptly from animals.

Interestingly, the structural work that enabled researchers to design neuraminidase inhibitors grew out of an accidental discovery.
Back in the late 1970s, one of us (Laver) was attempting to determine whether the N2 spike on the virus that caused the 1968 Hong Kong flu pandemic ( H3N2) had come from the strain responsible for the 1957 Asian flu pandemic ( H2N2).
As part of that effort, he wanted to compare the amino acid sequences of the molecules.
To start, he had to isolate and concentrate their heads--the domains that protrude from the viruses.

When Laver freed the neuraminidase heads from purified viruses and concentrated them in a centrifuge, he found to his surprise that the resulting pellet of material was not amorphous, as proteins usually are.
Instead it consisted of crystals. 
Crystals, which are highly ordered arrays of molecules, are essential for deciphering the three-dimensional structure of large proteins.
Hence, the unexpected production of neuraminidase crystals implied that the structure of neuraminidase could perhaps be deciphered.

In 1983 Peter Colman and his colleagues at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) in Australia did just that.
The work revealed that the neuraminidase spikes on influenza viruses consist of four identical molecules, or monomers.
The resulting tetramer resembles four squarish balloons atop a single stick.
The stick is embedded in the viral membrane, and the balloons protrude.
Colman's group soon discovered that each neuraminidase monomer in the foursome has a deep, central dent, or cleft, on its surface. 

The team also found that even though influenza neuraminidase molecules could differ in the precise amino acids they contained, all known versions--including those from type A and from type B viruses--had a striking commonality.
The amino acids that lined the wall of the cleft were invariant.

When parts of molecules resist change, the constancy usually implies that the unchanged components are essential to the molecules' functioning.
In this case, the uniformity suggested that the cleft formed the active, sialic acid cleaving site of neuraminidase and that the unchanging, or conserved, amino acids in the cleft were critical to maintaining catalytic function.
Subsequent work confirmed this suggestion.

Given that influenza viruses cannot spread readily from cell to cell without help from neuraminidase, the new discoveries implied that a drug able to occupy, and jam, the active site would inhibit neuraminidase in all versions of the influenza virus.
That is, such a "plug" drug might serve as a universal cure for the flu.

The Making of a Plug Drug

Pursuing this tantalizing idea, Colman's group identified the amino acids in the active site that normally contact sialic acid.
They also looked for amino acids in the cleft that did not bind sialic acid but might be exploited to help anchor a plug drug.
They noted, for instance, that the cleft included three positively charged amino acids that held tightly to a negatively charged group (carboxylate) on sialic acid.

In addition, at the bottom of the cleft they spotted a small pocket containing two negatively charged amino acids.
These amino acids--glutamates--made no contact with sialic acid but were nonetheless present in all influenza neuraminidases examined.
A hydroxyl (OH) group on the bound sialic acid pointed down toward that extra pocket but did not reach it.

These features suggested that replacing this OH with a large, positively charged atomic grouping might yield a tight-binding derivative.
The positive group would presumably nestle into the extra pocket at the bottom of the active site and would lock itself there by binding to the previously unused, negatively charged glutamates in the pocket [see illustration].

After some trial and error, in 1993 Mark von Itzstein and his colleagues at Monash University in Melbourne found that substituting a guanidino group (which is both large and positively charged) for the OH group on sialic acid produced an extraordinarily potent inhibitor of influenza neuraminidases.
Further, the inhibitor had little effect on related enzymes made by bacteria and mammals, a sign that the compound probably would not disrupt human cells. 

Studies in animals and preliminary trials in humans then revealed that the substance--zanamivir--prevented flu symptoms in individuals subsequently infected with influenza viruses and also reduced the severity of symptoms in those who took the drug after being infected.
The compound, however, did not work if swallowed as a pill; it had to be inhaled into the respiratory system through the nose or mouth.

Ironically, the guanidino group that makes zanamivir such a good inhibitor is the reason the substance cannot be taken as a pill.
An ingested drug has to cross the cells lining the intestine and migrate into the bloodstream before traveling to other parts of the body.
But charged molecules have difficulty crossing cell membranes, which are fatty and permeable mostly to noncharged substances.

Because inhalation is a common way to take medicine meant to work in the respiratory tract, Glaxo Wellcome in Stevenage, England, initiated further human testing of zanamivir.
Yet because some patients prefer to take a pill, Gilead Sciences in Foster City, Calif., joined with F. Hoffman-La Roche in Basel, Switzerland, to search for a neuraminidase inhibitor that could be taken as a tablet.
A systemic drug that traveled in the blood could also conceivably help fight any highly virulent influenzas that infected cells outside the respiratory tract. 

A Second Candidate Emerges

After synthesizing and testing many compounds, Gilead and F. Hoffman-La Roche finally found one, given the working name of GS 4071, that was as potent as zanamivir.
Structural analyses revealed that it retained one major neuraminidase-binding group also found in zanamivir: a negatively charged carboxylate group that bound to positively charged amino acids in the enzyme's active site.
In addition, the interaction of GS 4071 with the active site somehow caused one of the amino acids in the cleft to rotate and create a new hydrophobic (water-hating) pocket.
This pocket became an anchor for a similarly hydrophobic component (a chain of carbons and hydrogens) of the drug.

Initially the substance functioned well in the test tube and did no harm to healthy cells.
But it failed a crucial test:
the negative carboxylate group kept it from crossing out of the gut into the bloodstream in animals.
Happily, though, a small adjustment--in essence, placing a mask over the negative group--fixed that problem.
The masked form, dubbed GS 4104, passed easily into the bloodstream, after which it was unmasked, primarily in the blood and liver.
Having been converted back to its original ( GS 4071 ) form, it proceeded to inhibit the activity of neuraminidase and the spread of the virus in the respiratory tract of test animals.
Like zanamivir, it also showed signs of functioning well in people [see illustration].

Last fall reports from large, controlled human trials of zanamivir and GS 4104 confirmed and extended the earlier findings.
If begun within about a day and a half after symptoms develop, both the inhaled zanamivir and the swallowed GS 4104 can reduce the time that people feel ill by about 30 percent (1.5 to three days).
The compounds also reduce the severity of symptoms.
In a trial of GS 4104, for instance, rating diaries kept by patients indicated that symptoms were 25 to 60 percent milder than in those patients who took a dummy pill.
Further, the drugs lower the risk for potentially lethal secondary bacterial infections, such as bronchitis, by half or more.
Such complications are a major cause of flu deaths, especially among the elderly and people with concurrent disorders.

A small study of zanamivir has recently indicated that an injected form of the drug is helpful as well.
Separate investigations into prevention are encouraging, too.
When zanamivir was tested, 6 percent of nonusers but only 2 percent of users came down with the flu.
GS 4104 produced comparable results.
So far neither drug has caused serious side effects.

On the basis of such studies, Glaxo Wellcome has requested approval to market the inhaled form of zanamivir in Australia, Europe, Canada and the U.S. Gilead and F. Hoffman-La Roche are expected to submit a similar application for GS 4104 in the U.S. and Europe this year.
Other neuraminidase inhibitors developed by BioCryst Pharmaceuticals in Birmingham, Ala., have done well in studies of animals and have been licensed to Johnson & Johnson for further development.

To the casual observer, shaving a few days off a bout of the flu may seem a minor accomplishment, yet the achievement is more profound than it first appears.
The fatigue and other discomforts felt during the last days of the flu stem mainly from the lingering activity of the immune system after it has eliminated most of the virus in the body.
The anti-flu drugs cannot affect that activity.
But by halting viral replication, the compounds can certainly minimize the duration and severity of the early, most miserable part of a flu episode. 

As a rule, the earlier a person begins therapy, the better the outcome is--partly because the body will harbor a smaller, more manageable amount of virus and partly because the drugs cannot undo tissue damage caused by the virus before treatment starts.
This finding, combined with the research into prevention, implies that the best way to use these drugs may be in conjunction with instant tests that will signal the presence of an incipient infection before a person becomes symptomatic. 
It is quite conceivable that in the near future people will, say, dab their tongue each morning with a small strip of influenza-detecting test paper.
If the strip turns a color, the individuals will know they harbor the influenza virus and need to begin taking a flu-fighting drug to ward off symptoms. 
Quick detection kits are now becoming available for use in doctors' offices.
Manufacturers are trying to perfect tests for toc use as well.

Determining that a person has contracted the flu and not merely a cold or some other disorder is important because the drugs have power only against influenza viruses.
They would be wasted if taken to combat colds (which are caused by other kinds of viruses), allergies or bacterial infections that produce flulike symptoms.

Questions Although the neuraminidase-blocking agents are generating great excitement, certain questions remain.
Logic dictates that inhibition of viral replication and reductions in secondary complications should save lives, but whether the drugs will actually prevent deaths is not yet known.

Further, almost all drugs that humans lob at viruses and bacteria eventually become undermined by drug resistance.
As the microorganisms struggle for survival, those that alter the drug target and make it unrecognizable can escape the drug's effects [see "The Challenge of Antibiotic Resistance," by Stuart B. Levy; Scientific American, March 1998].
Amantadine and rimantadine are among those plagued by the resistance problem. 
Are there any reasons to think the new flu drugs will escape this fate?

In fact, there are.
Scientists have tried diligently to produce strains of influenza in the laboratory that are resistant to zanamivir and GS 4104.
So far they have had only limited success.
Some strains gained resistance, as might be anticipated, by altering amino acids in the active site of neuraminidase.
But these changes made the enzyme less stable or less active than usual, suggesting that viral survival in the body would be impaired.

Other strains became resistant not by altering neuraminidase but by changing the chemical makeup of hemagglutinin.
Recall that neuraminidase is needed to strip sialic acid off nascent viral particles, so that hemagglutinin will not stick to sialic acid on neighboring particles and prevent the virus from spreading to other cells.
The change in hemagglutinin reduced its affinity for sialic acid, thereby obviating the need for neuraminidase to intervene.
Although it thrived in cell culture, this second group of mutants showed no resistance to the drugs in animals.
Conceivably, the impaired binding between hemagglutinin and sialic acid reduced the infectivity of the strains by weakening their ability to dock with cells. 

Neuraminidase-blocking drugs are not the only ones under study.
Scientists have long been trying to build plug drugs that target the sialic acid binding site on hemagglutinin, for instance, but up to now the effort has failed.
Amantadine and rimantadine, the drugs already on the market, were found to work before their mechanism of action was known.
It is now evident that they interfere with the activity of a viral protein called M2, which functions as an ion channel.
This inhibition of M2 explains why the drugs have no effect against type B influenzas:
those viruses do not carry an M2 molecule.
As work on new drugs continues, so, too, do efforts to improve flu vaccines.

Between pandemics, smaller but still substantial influenza epidemics are common.
In 1994, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an estimated 90 million Americans (about 35 percent of the population) contracted the flu.
Collectively, those people spent 170 million days in bed and lost 69.3 million days of work.
More typically in the U.S., the flu afflicts 10 to 20 percent of the population every year and causes some 20,000 deaths from influenza-related complications. 

These numbers, like those associated with pandemics, are likely to fall in the next several years as new anti- flu drugs become available and as vaccines become more widely used and faster to produce.
Indeed, society may finally be heading for an era in which the human species gains the upper hand against the much dreaded influenza virus.
