
DNA'S NEW TWISTS

The known rules of genetics are only the beginning.

The newly discovered abilities of a familiar molecule are influencing theories about evolution and the inheritance of disease

Margaret G. Kidwell is patiently waiting for a miracle.
Bottles in her laboratory at the University of Arizona are the communal homes of two fruit fly species.
Because the flies cannot interbreed, they should remain genetically distinct.
Yet if Kidwell is right, bits of DNA will somehow pass from one species to the other.
Classical Mendelian genetics says that kind of inheritance should be impossible, but Gregor Mendel never reckoned with genes that might hitch a ride inside the hungry parasitic mites that prey on both species. 

Kidwell and her co-workers have found evidence that such a transfer has already happened at least once in the wild.

Mendel's laws may have intriguing loopholes, as Kidwell and other modem geneticists have learned.
The new tools that molecular biology has provided for assaying chromosomes have helped researchers take the measure of the genetic machinery more accurately.
And they are discovering intriguing twists to the traditional, more simplistic models of DNA's behavior. 
Contrary to expectations, genes sometimes leap from one chromosome to another or expand and contract like accordions. 
Chromosomes seem to carry chemical tags that identify whether they originated in an organism's mother or its father. 
Proteins can sometimes be specified by genes that, in the conventional sense, do not exist.
Workers have even found indications that organisms may be able to respond to changes in the environment by altering their genes.

"We must pay much more attention to the diversity of detail in the ways that organisms play out the basic properties of DNA, RNA and proteins," says Joshua Lederberg, a pioneering molecular geneticist and Nobelist serving on the faculty at the Rockefeller University.
During the 1940s, Lederberg made his reputation by showing that bacteria engaged in a sexual exchange of genetic material -a heretical notion at the time but now an accepted article of genetic principle.

The new heresies being discussed may be the keys to similar major revisions in genetics.
Already workers in the field are waking to the fact that DNA is not quite the predictably stable molecule they have often taken for granted.
"DNA isn't this inert thing encased in Lucite, sending out instructions," insists Jeffrey W. Pollard, a developmental biologist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
"It's part of the cell, and it's responding to what's happening around it".
In conversation, Pollard and other biologists occasionally refer to DNA as a "metabolic molecule" to reflect its biochemical responsiveness. 

Many researchers are wondering what the full significance of the emerging view will prove to be.
"I think a great deal of genetics and evolutionary theory has not yet caught up with the implications of the dynamic chemistry of DNA," Lederberg remarks.
He cautions that some of the phenomena may turn out to be will-o'-the-wisps having no more than marginal importance. 
Nevertheless, every level of molecular activity is clearly far more complex than was once believed.
No one is throwing out the old genetics texts, but new chapters are certainly being written.

The science of genetics was born during the mid-l9th century in the garden of the Moravian monastery where Mendel experimented with pea plants.
The mathematical rules of inheritance that he and subsequent workers developed became the cornerstone of modern biology.
None of those researchers knew what genes were, however:
they were just convenient abstractions for describing the transmission of traits.
Not until the 1950s was DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) identified as the primary genetic material, thus opening the era of molecular biology. 

The substitution of "DNA" for "gene" did little to alter the fundamentals of genetics.
In most discussions, DNA was still treated as an ideal entity that, barring the occasional mutation, was a comfortable constant in the turbulent internal environment of a cell.
Genetic information, researchers learned, was written in the double-strand helix of DNA as a sequence of its four constituent nucleotide bases.
Single strands of DNA acted as templates for making complementary molecules of messenger RNA (ribonucleic acid), which carried the information to the organelles called ribosomes.
The ribosomes then read the messenger RNA as though it were a ticker tape and, interpreting its bases three at a time, popped together appropriate amino acids to make a protein.
But as investigators have more closely scrutinized the actions of the genome (the complete set of an organism's genes) and its associated molecules, they have found that their properties and behavior are far more diverse. 

Jumping Genes

One of the first scientists to appreciate the dynamism of the genome was the geneticist Barbara McClintock, who died in 1992.
In 1947, while performing breeding experiments on maize at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, McClintock saw odd patterns in the inheritance of pigments that the conventional rules could not explain.
After puzzling over her results, she concluded that a few of the genes did not have fixed locations on a chromosome.
Rather they seemed to leap from one spot to another between parent and progeny.
Environmental stresses such as heat appeared to increase the rate at which such genes transposed themselves.

Like Mendel's results, McClintock's idea of transposable genetic elements, often called transposons or "jumping genes," languished for decades.
Nothing in the one-way flow of information from DNA to RNA to proteins seemed to allow for the possibility that genes could move.
In the early 1970s, however, McClintock's theory was vindicated.
Molecular biology experiments proved that small pieces of DNA did sometimes move within or between chromosomes, thereby triggering changes in gene expression.
By jumping to a site beside or within a gene, for example, a transposon could shut it off.
McClintock's discovery won her the Nobel Prize in 1983.

The origin of transposons is still obscure, but many are believed to be the remnants of viruses that permanently integrated their genes into their host.
A few viruses produce an enzyme called reverse transcriptase, which enables them to convert strands of RNA into DNA, thereby reversing the typical flow of information in cells.
Jumping genes generally seem to rely on a similar mechanism for their gymnastics:
some transposons make their own reverse transcriptases;
others borrow enzymes produced by more capable elements or viruses. 

However they accomplish their jumps, transposons can exert a powerful influence on the organism bearing them.
In a variety of plant and animal species, researchers have documented many genetic alterations caused by just such transpositions. 
Jumping genes have recently been shown to influence human health as well.

In 1991, for example, Francis S. Collins and his colleagues at the University of Michigan identified in one patient the mutation causing neurofibromatosis, a tumor-producing disorder.
A gene that normally regulates cell growth had been rendered inactive by the insertion of a common genetic element called Alu.
Two months later a team at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine headed by Haig H. Kazazian announced that it had caught another gene almost in the act of jumping.
While studying a group of hemophiliacs, the researchers discovered that in one child the disease was caused by a transposon that had inactivated a gene for an essential blood-clotting factor. 
The transposon was essentially identical to a gene at a different location in the child's parents.

Transposable elements are usually passed "vertically" from one generation to the next, like ordinary genes.
Yet their ability to take short hops within cells has also prompted speculation about the possibility that under rare circumstances they might jump "horizontally" from one organism to another -and maybe even between species.
Bacteria do exchange genes, as Lederberg proved, and transfers between bacteria and plants and insects are strongly suspected.
But no one has yet proved that transposons can move between higher organisms.
John F. McDonald, a molecular geneticist at the University of Georgia, notes that for many years biologists have noticed peculiar genetic similarities between various pairs of unrelated but cohabiting species.
These similarities suggested that genetic information had passed between them, "but it was a lot of arm waving because you couldn't really prove it was a genetic transfer," he says.

The Mite That Could

The best evidence, in the eyes of many researchers, comes from work presented in 1991 by Marilyn A. Houck, a mite specialist now at Texas Tech University, and by Kidwell.
They have found hints that recently a jumping gene called a P element moved between two species of fruit fly.

During the 1970s, Kidwell and others noticed that a strange genetic incompatibility had arisen between wild and laboratory stocks of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.
When the researchers tried to crossbreed the fly populations, they found that the crosses were often infertile or produced abnormal offspring.
These incompatibilities were eventually traced to the ubiquitous presence of P elements in the wild flies.
Only flies that had been isolated in laboratories for many generations were free of them.
The researchers deduced that the epidemic of P-element infestation must have started within the previous 30 to 50 years.

Gene-sequencing studies by Stephen B. Daniels of the University of Connecticut revealed that the P elements in D. melanogaster were virtually identical to those in a different fruit fly, D. willistoni Those findings created a strong circumstantial case that sometime in the 1940s or so -perhaps right around the time that McClintock was theorizing about jumping genes- P elements hopped from the willistoni to the melanogaster flies.

How the transfer had taken place would probably have remained a mystery if Kidwell's fly stocks had not become parasitized by an unusually nasty variety of mite.
Houck , who worked just down the hall from Kidwell, was given samples of the pests to find a way to exterminate them.
The mites were eventually identified as Proctolaelaps regalis.
After examining them under an electron microscope, Houck noticed that their mouthparts bore a striking similarity to the thin glass tubes used by biologists in gene transfer experiments.

That similarity suggested to Houck that nature might have used the mites for a little genetic engineering of its own.
After dining on a D. willistoni, a mite with P elements still on its mouthparts or in its digestive tract could have feasted on an egg of D. melanogaster.
Conceivably, P elements that passed into the egg might have integrated with its DNA. 
If the egg survived, the result would be a fly that had inherited P elements from another species.

"There's no doubt m my mind" Houck says, "that this will turn out to be horizontal transfer."
Kidwell remarks, "The P element spreads like crazy once it gets inserted properly.
I think it's that initial step of getting integrated that's the tricky one."

The theory involves many suppositions and long shots, but Houck and Kidwell have already established that at least part of it stands up.
They have shown that mites preying on the flies do pick up recognizable P elements in their gut.
Houck and Kidwell are now separately doing experiments to see if they can complete the transmission process.
Kidwell is raising D. melanogaster and D. willistoni together in the presence of mites to see whether she can reproduce the interspecies transfer.
Houck is looking at more specific aspects of the problem.

At this point, the scientists have not ruled out the possibility that viruses might have participated in the cross-species jump. 
For many years, viruses have been discussed as theoretical vectors for transposons, which they might have woven into their own genetic material and carried to different host cells.
McDonald notes that researchers have found at least one example of a transposon in a virus that infects several species of insects.

If transposable elements can be shown to move between species, the finding will further improve the case for them as agents of evolutionary change.
Last summer hundreds of geneticists gathered in Athens, Ga., to explore the ramifications of transposable elements for evolution theory.
"The traditional Darwinian view is that evolution proceeds gradual]y through the accumulation of point mutations and that selection pulls out what is not good," explains McDonald, who organized the conference.
"But the thing about transposable elements is that they tend to produce macromutations -sudden, substantive changes in phenotype- in shorter periods of time."

By suppressing the expression of other genes, McDonald offers, transposons could function as genetic regulators.
"On a molecular level they're producing new regulatory networks, but on a phenotypic level that may translate into new developmental patterns," he says.

Diane M. Robins of the University of Michigan has found what may be one bit of such a network.
As she explained at the Athens conference, she has discovered that the regulatory sequence for one gene in mice strongly resembles part of a transposon found elsewhere in the animal's genome.
The insertion and retention of the transposon component at that site seem to have made the gene responsive to levels of circulating hormones.

Other hints that a transposon may have had a more clearly beneficial effect in human evolution have been discovered by Linda C. Samuelson, who works with Robins.
In many mammals the pancreas secretes the enzyme amylase to digest starches in the diet.
But humans also secrete amylase in their saliva, which seems to broaden the range of foods they can eat.
Samuelson has shown that a transposon may have enabled this dual expression of amylase by altering the regulation of the gene for the enzyme.

Some biologists even speculate that transposons play a major role in the origin of species.
Jeffrey Pollard thinks transposons may be partly responsible for the punctuated pattern of evolution that many paleontologists see when they look at the fossil record.
In his view, organisms that find themselves in unfamiliar environmental niches may experience stresses that hasten the rate of gene jumping.
In effect, the organisms would become more mutable and might therefore evolve faster.

Kidwell takes a more cautious view of the role of transposable elements in evolution.
"I think at the moment it is still very much up in the air," she comments. 
"Personally, I have to admit a bias toward there being a functional role, but I think it could be really complex.
We can't make any great claims for it yet."

The Amazing Colossal Genes

Whatever the extent of their effects, jumping genes represent a type of mutation unforeseen by the founders of genetics.
In recent years, researchers have discovered another one that is in many respects even more unorthodox: abnormal genes that suddenly balloon in size, with tragic consequences.
The discovery of this type of mutation is helping geneticists to fathom the odd patterns of inheritance associated with several diseases.
One of them is fragile X syndrome, the most common inherited cause of mental retardation, which draws its name from a chromosomal deformity in its sufferers.
They have an X chromosome in which the tip of its long arm is attached by only a slender thread of DNA.

In 1991 groups led by Jean-Louis Mandel of INSERM in Strasbourg, Grant R. Sutherland of Adelaide Children's Hospital in Australia and Stephen T. Warren of the Emory University School of Medicine jointly discovered that the cause of the disorder was a mutation unlike any previously seen.
In normal individuals, a gene designated FMR-1 contains about 60 or fewer tandem repeats of a particular trinucleotide base sequence.
Healthy carriers of fragile X syndrome may have as many as 200 tandem copies. 
In sick individuals the tandem repeat region is fantastically larger:
many hundreds to thousands of the base triplets appear.
Because children with fragile X syndrome are the offspring of healthy carriers, the mutant genes must be growing from one generation to the next.

Similar expansions have been found to cause myotonic dystrophy, the common form of muscular dystrophy in adults, and a rare condition called spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
The mechanism of this explosive change is still unknown, but researchers suspect that an aberrant form of polymerase -an enzyme that adds nucleotides to growing DNA strands- is the culprit.

"The big question, I think, is that there are a lot of repeat regions in the genome," Warren reflects.
"Why don't you see those undergoing this massive expansion? "
In fact, he notes, David E. Housman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has found evidence that a number of sequences in the genome of mice do expand and shrink, though less dramatically than the one in FMR-1.

Warren concludes that some singular instability in certain forms of FMR-1 may predispose it to extreme growth.
Over one or more generations, the unstable allele, or form of the gene, grows to the size seen in the healthy carriers of fragile X syndrome.
When the gene reaches a critical length, it is primed for more spectacular elongation, which occurs in the affected individuals.
For reasons not yet clear, the gene seems to expand most dramatically in individuals who have inherited the fragile chromosome from their mother.
"It seems quite clear that first there is a change from a stable to an unstable allele," he says.

An interesting consequence of the expanding mutation phenomenon, Warren muses, is that "it makes you look again at quantitative genetics in humans."
Most mutations reach a stable equilibrium frequency in a population within a few generations because selection can favor or remove them proportionally to the mutation's effects. 
"That's textbook genetics," he says.
"But now we're saying, no, there's a mutation that has no effect on offspring or on their offspring, but somewhere later down the road it does." 

The expanding mutations illuminate the highly peculiar pattern of inheritance that marks fragile X syndrome, also known as Sherman's paradox.
The classical genetics for X-linked diseases predicts that all males carrying the fragile chromosome will be affected by it.
In fact, more than 20 percent of those men are perfectly normal because they have shorter "premutation" forms of FMR-l.
Their children, too, are normal because their genes have expanded only minimally.
Both the male and female grandchildren of the original carriers, however, are often retarded because the repeat region in their genes has spectacularly expanded.

Warren and many others maintain that the observed pattern of gene expansion is sufficient to explain Sherman's paradox.
A few dissenting biologists, however, argue that something more is going on.
"The fact that you see the biggest changes in nucleotide sequence occurring only through Mom's germ line is still difficult to explain," insists Carmen Sapienza of the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research in La Jolla, Calif.
Sapienza is one of a group of researchers who think another phenomenon that violates the traditional genetic dogma may also be at work: sex-specific imprinting of chromosomes.

Gene Imprinting

One fundamental assumption of Mendelian genetics is that the effect of a gene is totally independent of whether it came from an organism's mother or from its father.
Yet geneticists have found compelling instances in which males and females seem to imprint, or mark, the genes that they pass on.
Experiments on mice have shown that embryos with a full set of chromosomes derived from just one sex inevitably fail to reach birth, even though they are genetically identical to normal mice.
Without a maternal imprint on its chromosomes, an embryo becomes abnormal; without a paternal imprint, the placenta fails to develop. 

In humans, imbalances in the complement of maternally and paternally imprinted chromosomes occasionally lead to illness. 
Robert D. Nicholls and his colleagues at the University of Florida have found interesting evidence for the effects of genome imprinting in at least two diseases.
Children who have Prader-Willi syndrome, which is characterized by mental retardation and obesity, often seem to have inherited both of their copies of chromosome 15 from their mothers.
Conversely, children lacking portions of their maternal chromosome 15 (and whose paternal chromosome is therefore disproportionately represented) exhibit the mental retardation and staccato movements of Angelman syndrome.
Sapienza and others have also linked abnormal imprinting to several childhood cancers. 

Precisely how genes can be imprinted is not yet certain, but the process may involve the chemical linkage of methyl groups to cysteine, one of the bases in DNA.
Methylation of DNA seems to inactivate the marked genes.
Moreover, the pattern of methylation is retained when the DNA replicates.
Imprints in a fertilized egg can therefore be passed on to all the cells of the developing body.

Charles D. Laird of the University of Washington postulates that imprinting of the fragile X chromosome, rather than genetic expansion, is the key to Sherman's paradox.
He has developed a model for the disease that he believes describes its behavior more accurately than do the molecular data alone. 

It is built around the observation that females, who have two X chromosomes in each cell, typically turn off one of them through imprinting.
Normally, this imprint is fully removed before the chromosomes enter meiosis, the cell-division process that produces ova.
Laird suggests that in the carriers of fragile X, a mutation in the chromosome sometimes prevents the removal of the imprint from the fragile site.

Consequently, about half of the sons of a healthy woman carrying the genetic defect will receive an X chromosome that is partially but permanently inactive and will be mentally retarded as a result.
Some of her daughters will also receive an inactive fragile X, and they too will suffer.
In Laird's view, the expanding mutations seen by Warren and his colleagues could be no more than secondary effects of the deactivating imprint on the fragile site.

Sapienza hails Laird's analysis as "a real detective-work tour de force."
Warren and his colleagues are generally less impressed.
They say Laird has amended his theory several times to make it agree more closely with the observed data.
Further research may help settle the controversy:
Warren is currently trying to insert an expanded repeat region into a chromosome to see whether that is enough to make the FMR-1 gene less stable.

Directed Mutations

A still greater controversy rippling molecular genetics these days concerns the effects of the environment on genomes. 
Radiation, carcinogenic chemicals and other agents are well known for their ability to induce random mutations.
Yet a few biologists are investigating the possibility that environmental stresses can sometimes direct the kinds of mutations that occur.
The idea is often seen as deeply heretical because it seems to resurrect the great bugaboos of Lamarckian evolutionary models, mutation with intention and the inheritance of acquired characteristics.

The notion that the environment could reshape inheritance fell out of favor at the turn of the century because of the doctrine that the germ-line cells, which make eggs and sperm, are distinct and isolated from the somatic (body) cells.
Cells in the immune system and other tissues might change their genes in response to the environment, but the germ cells would not.
Yet, Pollard points out, that generalization is at odds with many biological observations.
"What people forget," he says, "is that most organisms do not sequester their germ cells."

The sexual tissues of flowers, for example, arise from ordinary somatic cells.
For unicellular organisms, the inapplicability of the doctrine is even more obvious.
These exceptions raise the possibility that, in at least some species, genetic changes that promote survival might be immediately and preferentially passed on to an organism's descendants.
From a teleological perspective, the organisms would appear to have mutated to fit their environment better.

Much of the current fuss over directed mutations began in 1988 with a paper published by cancer researcher John Cairns, then at the Harvard School of Public Health.
Curious about how organisms mutated, he decided to reexamine the genetic tenet that mutations favorable to survival are no more probable than unfavorable ones.
Cairns grew bacteria on a medium where the sugar that they could metabolize was in short supply, but another sugar, lactose, was abundant.
His results led him to believe that mutations reactivating the bacteria's defective gene for a lactose-digesting enzyme were indeed occurring more often than chance would dictate.
The forces of selection seemed to be not merely weeding out unfit organisms but actively steering the mutations in a beneficial direction.

A few months later Barry G. Hall, now at the University of Rochester, presented even more convincing evidence for selection-induced mutations.
He performed similar experiments in which hungry bacteria needed two separate mutations - neither of which seemed to confer any benefit alone- to use a new food source.
Hall calculated that the odds of both mutations occurring without encouragement were astronomically poor, yet he, too, found that a surprising number of bacteria evolved to fit their surroundings.
Several other investigators have also observed selection-induced mutations in bacteria;
last summer Hall announced that he had also seen them in yeast.

"Now, I should say what we actually know about the mechanisms: nothing," Hall says.
But, he continues, "we do have, I think, sufficient data to reject some of the models that have been put forth."
Experiments, he says, have already invalidated Cairns's suggestion that reverse transcriptase was writing the information for beneficial mutations from abnormal RNA into the bacterial DNA.

A far more plausible mechanism is the transcriptional mutagenesis model.
It suggests that the DNA in active genes might mutate exceptionally fast because it becomes a single strand -and therefore more vulnerable- during transcription.
Unfortunately, Hall says, the evidence has ruled that out, too. 
Other ideas have been proposed:
for example, Hall thinks there is still life in his suggestion that a few cells in a stressed population can enter a hypermutable state.
Only the hypermutable cells that subsequently achieve a beneficial mutation would survive; the others would cease to be viable. 
"That would account for why cells with mutations at other sites aren't found, because those cells die," Hall explains. 

Yet no matter how reasonable such hypothetical mechanisms may sound, many scientists are deeply skeptical of directed mutations. 
"I don't think the evidence is very good for it," remarks Richard E. Lenski of Michigan State University, who has co-authored several papers rebutting Cairns, Hall and others.
He maintains that many of their experiments lacked sufficient controls and that estimating the number of mutations responsible for an observed population is tricky.
Biochemical phenomena may well bias the mutation rates and create the illusion of directed mutations, as proponents of the idea claim, but Lenski has not yet seen results that persuade him such phenomena are having significant effects.

Yet Lenski sees value coming out of the work on directed mutations.
" There does seem to be, in some cases, an increase in the mutation rate when cells are under stressful conditions," he says.
"That isn't directed mutation, as has been claimed, but there does seem to be a physiological dependence to certain mutation rates."
The fact that scientists are scrutinizing the potential molecular mechanisms and evolutionary consequences of such influences is a useful development, he observes. 

Editing RNA

Novel mutations and other quirks in the chemistry of DNA are not solely responsible for the layers of complexity being added to molecular genetics.
Indeed, they cannot be considered apart from the accompanying discoveries that researchers have been making about what occurs during the transcription and translation of the genetic message into proteins.
Contrary to early theories, the RNA molecules transcribed from the DNA of genes must often undergo extensive chemical processing before they are ready to serve as the messengers for protein synthesis.

In all organisms more complex than bacteria, for example, the instructions in a primary RNA transcript for making a protein are interrupted by long sequences that are essentially meaningless. 
During RNA processing, these "intron" sequences are chopped out of the molecule, and the meaningful "exons" are spliced together to make a shorter, more coherent molecule.
In 1982 Thomas R. Cech of the University of Colorado and Sidney Altman of Yale University made the Nobel Prize-winning discovery that some intron sequences in RNA had a built-in enzyme that allowed them to perform these cut-and-splice operations themselves.

Perhaps the most extraordinary form of processing is RNA editing, in which crucial information that is not clearly specified in the DNA is added to RNA molecules.
Properly speaking, RNA editing embraces several different phenomena occurring in organisms as diverse as mammals, amphibians, plants, protozoa and viruses.
In all its variations, RNA editing involves the specific addition of bases to RNA molecules or the transformation of certain bases within them.
More than one mechanism is probably at work.
"The term ' RNA editing' in its general sense has been used loosely," notes Kenneth D. Stuart, who investigates the phenomenon at the Seattle Biomedical Research Institute. 

The best understood instance of RNA editing -and possibly the most startling- came from studies of trypanosome parasites, which cause sleeping sickness and other illnesses.
The mitochondrial DNA of trypanosomes has a unique structure:
it consists of several dozen large loops called maxicircles and thousands of smaller ones called minicircles.
All the loops interlink into a network that resembles a sloppily made piece of chain mail.

The oddness of this DNA did not end with its structure. 
The minicircles seemed to contain no useful genetic information at all.
Biologists eventually determined that the maxicircles carried most of the genes found in the mitochondria of other organisms.
Yet crucial genes, such as those that make transfer RNA, were missing.

Molecular biologists became even more baffled when they looked at the messenger RNAs:
many of the molecules were longer than the DNA from which they had been transcribed.
One strand of RNA was more than twice as long as its DNA counterpart. 
Uridine bases had been strategically added throughout those RNAs, making sense out of what at the DNA level had been nonsensical "cryptogenes," a term coined by Larry Simpson of the University of California at Los Angeles.

In 1990 Simpson, Beat Blum and Norbert Bakalara offered an explanation.
Both the maxicircles and the minicircles produce small "guide RNAs" that find and correct omissions in the messenger RNA.
A guide RNA and the messenger strand to which it anchors fit together like the halves of a zipper. 
Wherever the messenger RNA is missing a uridine, a misalignment occurs.
At those mismatch sites, a uridine is spliced into the messenger sequence.
"RNA editing actually creates the mature messenger RNA sequence," Stuart says.

Why such a system would have evolved is still a mystery, but one possibility is that it affords the parasites control over the expression of genes during different parts of their complex life cycles.
How the guide RNAs direct the cut- and-splice activity of their editing is also still not completely understood.
One model, first published by Cech and independently conceived by Blum and Simpson, holds that the guide RNAs may perform the operation themselves, donating uridines from their own strands in the process.
Last April, Stuart and his team reported that they had found guide RNAs bound to the messenger molecules, a crucial piece of evidence in favor of their theory. 

The Not-So-Universal Code

After the splicing, editing or other processing is complete, a messenger RNA is ready to be translated into protein by the ribosomes.
Even that step, however, turns out to be more complex than was once thought.
To perform the translation, a ribosome must decipher the genetic code in the RNA.
Each codon, or three-base sequence in the RNA, corresponds to one instruction, such as to add a particular amino acid or to stop lengthening the protein.

One might imagine that because the genetic code is so fundamental to life, it would be universal.
Not so: the code used to decipher RNA from the nucleus is slightly different from that for RNA in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
In mitochondrial RNA, for example, the codon adenine-guanine-adenine is an instruction to add the amino acid valine to a growing peptide chain, but in nuclear RNA it is a stop codon marking the end of the coding sequence.

Many experiments have shown that the codes are sometimes flexible.
To make some proteins, a ribosome must alter its translation of certain codons within a single strand of messenger RNA.
Investigators have shown that ribosomes making a protein in mammalian blood interpret certain stop codons -but not all- as instructions to add the amino acid selenocysteine. 

Moreover, the meaningful codons in messenger RNA are not always side by side.
Ribosomes must occasionally "frame shift," skipping forward or backward over one or more bases, to find a codon.
In one case identified by Wai Mun Huang of the University of Utah Medical Center, ribosomes ignore a sequence of 50 bases in the messenger molecule.
John F. Atkins of University College in Cork, Ireland, and his colleagues have proposed the name "RNA recoding" for this reinterpretation of messenger RNA by ribosomes.

RNA recoding and processing, genome imprinting of the chromosomes and all the new varieties of mutations are only a few of the phenomena now invigorating molecular genetics.
The emerging picture of a dynamic genome in no way denigrates the more traditional model, which is itself a remarkable intellectual achievement. 
Geneticists sought and found rules that applied well to the inheritance of characteristics m organisms as diverse as bacteria, roses, giraffes and humans.
"We should feel lucky that we can find any generalizations at all," Lederberg remarks.
"It's unlikely that we're going to find any principles that are m absolutely universal application."

Indeed, it is the simplicity of traditional genetics that has endowed it with such power.
Its generalizations do describe most genetic phenomena m most organisms most of the time.
Without them, biology could never have progressed to its current understanding of life.
The great challenges for molecular geneticists now and m the future will be to explore the implications of the exceptions and to find new sets of even more potent rules if any exist.
