
Integrins and Health

Discovered only recently, these adhesive cell-surface molecules have quickly revealed themselves to be critical to proper functioning of the body and to life itself.

The cells of the body stick to one another and to the packing material, or extracellular matrix, around them.
As might be expected, this adhesion holds tissues together and is therefore essential to survival.
Less obviously, it helps to direct both embryonic development and an array of processes in the fully formed organism, including blood clotting, wound healing and eradication of infection.
Unfortunately, the stickiness of cells can also contribute to a number of disorders, among them rheumatoid arthritis, heart attack, stroke and cancer.

Although scientists have long recognized the importance of adhesive interactions in the body, until recently they knew little about how such interactions exert their diverse effects on physiology.
The fog began to lift about 20 years ago, when investigators isolated some of the matrix molecules that stick to cells.
During the past 15 years, they have learned that cell-surface molecules called Integrins are central players in many adhesion-related phenomena.
Not surprisingly, drugmakers are already capitalizing on the findings to develop novel treatments for a number of diseases.

I feel fortunate to have been among the investigators who identified the first integrins and uncovered their activities. 
But the integrin story is not the tale of a single laboratory. 
More than in many areas of biology, understanding of Integrins has unfolded through the cooperation of teams exploring widely divergent processes.
Some of us started with an interest in embryonic development.
Others were more concerned with the functioning of the mature body or the progression of specific diseases.
The extent of the cross-fertilization and the pace of progress have been nothing short of exhilarating. 

A dramatic example of the importance of adhesion to proper cell function comes from studies of the interaction between matrix components and mammary epithelial cells.
Epithelial cells in general form the skin and the lining of most body cavities; 
they are usually arranged in a single layer on a specialized matrix called the basal lamina.
The particular epithelial cells that line mammary glands produce milk in response to hormonal stimulation.
If mammary epithelial cells are removed from mice and cultured in laboratory dishes, they quickly lose their regular, cuboidal shape and the ability to make milk proteins. 
If, however, they are grown in the presence of laminin (the major adhesive protein in the basal lamina), they regain their usual form, organize a basal lamina and assemble into glandlike structures capable once again of producing milk components.

By the early 1980s scientists interested in how the extracellular matrix can control the activity of adherent cells had made some headway in studies focused on the matrix itself.
They knew that the matrix consists primarily of gel-like chains of sugars and interconnected fibrous proteins, although the amount of matrix and the details of its structure can vary from one tissue to the next.
The proteins include laminin and fibronectin (another adhesion molecule) as well as collagen, which is sometimes adhesive but is the primary structural component of most matrices. 
And microscopy had indicated that adhesive matrix molecules were linked-presumably through one or more intermediary molecules-to the system of intracellular fibers (the cytoskeleton) that gives cells their threedimensional shape.

Investigators were also well aware that formation of attachments between cells and a matrix can affect the cells in any number of ways; the response of the cells depends on the type of cells involved, their state at the moment and the specific makeup of the matrix.
Sometimes cells respond by changing shape. 

Other times they migrate, proliferate, differentiate (become more specialized) or revise their activities more subtly.
Often the various changes issue from alterations in the activity of genes.
Genes specify the sequences of amino acids in proteins, which carry out most cellular functions.
When genes are active, or expressed, they give rise to the specified proteins.
As genes are switched on and off, the mix of proteins in a cell changes and so does the operation of the cell. 

To understand how the extracellular matrix elicits such diverse changes in cells, however, researchers needed to identify the receptors on cells that serve as the docking sites for matrix proteins.
Scientists often isolate a receptor for a selected molecule by noting which components in cell extracts stick to copies of that molecule.
But the receptors in this case were frustratingly difficult to isolate.

Part of the reason, we now see, was that adhesion molecules of the matrix bind to a variety of substances, such as other matrix components.
This problem diminished when the cell-binding site on fibronectin was finally pinpointed.
Remarkably, this region consists essentially of a sequence of just three amino acids-arginine, glycine and aspartate. (It is commonly called RGD, for the single letter codes assigned to those amino acids.) Another reason for the difficulty was that individual receptors for matrix molecules often do not bind tightly to matrix proteins.
Strong adhesion is achieved through a kind of Velcro effect: many relatively weak attachments collectively form a stronger one.
Weak binding by the individual receptors meant they did not remain attached long enough to allow for ready detection.

All in the (Integrin) Family

In spite of the difficulties, by the mid-1980s scientists had managed to isolate several cell-surface adhesion receptors. 
They had also determined the sequences of some of the amino acids in the molecules.
In 1987 the combined results revealed that the receptors belonged to a large family of structurally related molecules, one or more of which appeared on virtually every cell type in the animal kingdom.
In recognition of the family's importance to the structural integrity of cells and tissues, the molecules were named "integrins." Later, as I shall explain, the name proved apt in yet another way.

Meanwhile research into the structure and function of integrins took off.
The finding that integrins come in many flavors and that they occur on most cell types suddenly meant that questions difficult to address with one kind of cell could potentially be tractable with another.
This flexibility and the sharing of discoveries from many disciplines led to quick progress and kept most of us brimming with new ideas to explore.

Early on we understood that Integrins consist of two protein chains, or subunits.
The subunit designated "alpha" is today known to have about 15 variants, and the "beta" subunit has about eight variants.
The chains, which are generally named by a number or letter, combine into at least 20 different integrins.
We also realized that certain Integrins adhere to only a single type of tar get molecule but that others recognize multiple targets.
Most integrins interact with the extracellular matrix.
Some do participate in adhesion between cells, but the molecules responsible for most cell-to-cell adhesive interactions belong to groups that go by such names as the cadherin, selectin and immunoglobulin families.
We learned early as well that Integrins span the cell membrane.
The parts of the alpha and beta chains that protrude from the cell collaborate to form the receptor for fibronectin and for other extracellular binding partners (ligands).

It is now clear that for the extracellular connections to hold tightly, the part of an integrin that extends into the cytoplasm (the cell's internal fluid) must be anchored to the cytoskeleton.
This linkage is achieved in an interesting way.
When the receptor becomes bound by a molecule outside the cell and aggregates with other bound integrins, highly organized complexes known as focal adhesions form.
These adhesions, which can vary in size and structure, incorporate a variety of molecules, including the cytoplasmic tails of the clustered Integrins and components of the cytoskeleton.
Receptor binding and aggregation also cause the cytoskeleton to become organized: 
cells that were rounded take on a definite structure. 

Integrin-mediated attachment of cells to a matrix can also facilitate travel by peripatetic cells, notably those of developing organisms and the white blood cells of the immune system.
Migration begins with the extension of footlike protrusions at the front of a cell.
Next, integrin molecules near the leading edge form traction-providing links to the underlying matrix.
At about the same time, similar linkages at the rear of the cell release, causing the back part of the cell to move forward, as if one end of a spring were let go.
We do not yet know what forces induce the cells to release the matrix connections at the rear.
Nor do we fully understand the biochemical and mechanical forces that produce forward motion of the front or the rear.
Nevertheless, the cycle, once accomplished, is repeated.

From Structure to Function

Along with acting as cellular "glue" and at times facilitating migration, integrins have a third-quite powerful- effect on cells. 
By about 1990, attachment of integrins to molecules outside the cell was found to activate so-called signal transduction pathways on the inside.
These pathways, consisting of molecules that relay messages through the cytoplasm, evoke such responses as gene expression, cell division and induction of processes that prevent cells from self-destructing.

Shortly after, scientists discovered that signaling by integrins can modulate the messages relayed into cells by growth factors.
Growth factors, which can travel from one cell to another, had earlier been shown to activate specific signal transduction pathways that control which genes are expressed and whether a target cell reproduces or even continues to survive. 
Now studies of Integrins demonstrated that to live and proliferate, normal (nonmalignant) cells must be attached to a specific matrix when they are stimulated by growth factors. 
If either growth factors or adhesive contacts are lost, a dividing cell will stop proliferating and will eventually die. 
In short, roughly three years after the integrins were named, they were found to live up to their name in a new way. 
They help to integrate many of the diverse signals that impinge on cells; in so doing, they determine a cell's fate. 

It seems that much of this internal signalling results from activation of molecules that reside with integrins in focal adhesions.
This function has been studied most thoroughly in fibroblasts (connective tissue cells), where the complexes are quite large, consisting of more than 20 different molecules. 
Certain of the molecules in those focal adhesions (such as enzymes of the Src kinase family) have long been known to participate in signaling pathways switched on by growth factors. 
Their presence in the complexes suggests that matrix molecules and growth factors may sometimes modulate one another's messages by sending signals down convergent or intersecting pathways. 
Other focal adhesion molecules that are activated by integrins (focal adhesion kinase, paxillin and tensin) typically are not much affected by growth factor activity.
Yet they display binding sites for known signal-transducing components a property that suggests they, too, help to convey messages from integrins to genes and other parts of the cell.

What is less clear is exactly how Integrins stimulate signaling molecules in focal adhesions.
Certain kinds of cellsurface molecules, notably many growth factor receptors, are tyrosine kinases: they add phosphate groups to tyrosine amino acids on other proteins and, in so doing, regulate the activity of target molecules.
But integrins exhibit no kinase activity.
Nor are they phosphatases-enzymes that control other molecules by removing phosphates from them.
And integrins lack the usual docking sites by which typical signal-transducing molecules attach to one another-which means they probably do not alter those molecules directly.
How, then, do the integrins elicit so much internal signaling?
They might help signaling molecules to come into contact with one another, but no one yet has a definitive answer.

Integrins do not respond solely to signals received from outside the cell;
they react to messages received from inside as well.
This inside-out signaling can cause the integrins to become either more or less choosy about which molecules they will accept as binding partners, or such signaling can change the strength with which the integrins bind.
The xxx integrin, for example, can be inactive, a receptor for collagen or a receptor for both collagen and laminin, depending on the cell that produces it and the signals impinging on it from within the cell.

Inside-out signaling has been studied most thoroughly in platelets-small blood cells that lack a nucleus and help to form blood clots known as thrombi [ see illustration on preceding two pages ].
Thrombi form at injured areas of blood vessels and, like a finger in a dike, temporarily prevent blood from escaping.
Platelets circulating in the blood travel singly and are nonadherent.
They switch gears, however, when blood vessels, which are lined by a single layer of endothelial cells, become damaged.

First, the platelets stick (without the help of integrins) to areas of extracellular matrix that have become exposed by disruption of the endothelial cells.
This attachment, or subsequent binding to a protein called thrombin, sends a signal into the cytoplasm that ultimately leads to inside-out activation of the xxx integrin on the platelet surface; in this case, the signaling causes the integrin to become more adhesive. 
Now the xxx integrin grasps circulating molecules of fibrinogen or von Willebrand factor, which in turn form molecular bridges to more platelets and to the matrix.
The resulting aggregate of platelets and proteins culminates in a dense meshwork of cells and fibers.

Integrins in Health and Illness

Beyond examining the effects of Integrins on individual cells, scientists have been exploring the molecules' roles in the body as a whole.
Ironically, understanding of how integrins direct the maturation of an embryo is sketchier than knowledge of how they participate in some other processes, even though curiosity about the molecular underpinnings of development fueled much of the research leading to the discovery of integrins and other adhesion molecules.

We do have proof, though, that Integrins must be operational for development to proceed normally.
As the cells of an embryo proliferate and differentiate to form the tissues and organs of the body, they add and subtract Integrins from their surface, a sign that the added integrins are involved in the passage through each new stage.
Another indication of the need for integrins is the discovery that the cells of embryos rely on particular integrins to help them travel to and find their final destinations.

Moreover, genetic engineering has let scientists produce animals, typically fruit flies and mice, that lack one integrin or another.
The animals often become deformed or die during development, demonstrating that the absence of the "knocked out" integrins is at fault.
In the malformed embryos, tissues become disorganized apparently because cells fail to travel to the proper places or to form the adhesive contacts required for cohesion.
Indeed, in certain mutant fruit flies, newly completed muscles fall apart during the first contractions, as muscle cells detach from connective tissue.

Ongoing research has also established the importance of integrins to normal physiology in mature organisms and has identified their contribution to various diseases.
One critical process that requires integrins is inflammation-the complex set of responses that are set in motion by injury or infection.
When tissue is damaged or colonized by a disease-causing microbe, certain white blood cells (leukocytes), such as neutrophils and monocytes, leave the bloodstream and race to the troubled region.
There they mop up debris and foreign substances and attack any pathogens.
The leukocytes additionally secrete substances that retard the spread of infection; if necessary, the cells also recruit other white cells known as lymphocytes to destroy invaders.

For white cells to make their way into compromised tissue, they must first be drawn from the main current of the blood. 
They are plucked out by endothelial cells that have detected a problem in the vicinity.
Adhesive reactions that typically involve selectins, not integrins, cause the leukocytes to slow down and roll along the endothelial lining of the vessel walls. 
Then, inside-out signalling causes certain integrins on the leukocytes (mainly those containing xxx or xxx subunits) to gain affinity for molecules of the immunoglobulin family-particularly those called ICAMs (intercellular adhesion molecules)-on endothelial cells.
These attachments help the leukocytes to stop, squeeze between endothelial cells and cross the blood vessel wall into the damaged or infected tissue. 

The importance of integrins in inflammation is highlighted by a disease, called leukocyte adhesion deficiency, in individuals who lack the xxx integrin subunit or who produce a defective version.
Because their leukocytes are unable to migrate to sites of injury and trauma, these people suffer from repeated life-threatening infections.

The inflammatory response protects the body from serious infections, but it can contribute to disease if it persists too long or occurs inappropriately.
Hoping to improve treatment of disorders that involve chronic inflammation, investigators are developing a variety of compounds (mainly targeted to the xxx and xxx integrins) that interfere with integrin-mediated adhesion of white cells to endothelial cells.
Indeed, such drugs are now being tested in patients with asthma, inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis.

Inflammation can also be destructive acutely, during reperfusion-the restoration of blood flow to tissue that has been denied blood during, say, frostbite, heart attack or stroke. (Many heart attacks and strokes result from occlusion of a major blood vessel feeding the heart or brain.) The temporary loss of blood can kill and injure tissue.
When blood flow is restored, neutrophils in the bloodstream sense the damage, migrate to the disrupted areas and release substances known as oxidants.

Oxidants can destroy pathogens, but they can also harm fragile cells and wreak further damage.
Investigators are attempting to halt this so-called reperfusion injury with drugs that target either xxx integrins on neutrophils or their ICAM partners on endothelial cells; by keeping the integrins and ICAMs apart, such drugs should prevent neutrophils from leaving the bloodstream to invade reperfused tissue.

As is true of inflammation, too much or too little thrombus formation can be dangerous.
People who lack the xxx integrin (the one that is so important to platelet aggregation) suffer from Glanzmann's thrombasthenia; their platelets do not aggregate properly, and the victims bleed excessively.
At the other end of the spectrum, excessive thrombus development, which often occurs where fatty deposits (atherosclerotic plaque) build up in blood vessels, may lead to heart attack or stroke if a thrombus obstructs a blood vessel.

Doctors have ways to clean out atherosclerotic arteries, such as by balloon angioplasty.
Unfortunately, this process can be unkind to endothelial cells, and so worrisome thrombi occasionally form in the arteries within about a day after treatment. 
Further, in a process called restenosis, vessels in many patients can become occluded again over a period of many months, this time mainly by smooth muscle cells that migrate and proliferate, perhaps initially in response to substances present in thrombi that form near the sites of damage.
Medicines that temporarily stop the xxx integrin from interacting with fibrinogen are already in use to keep treated vessels clear of thrombi in the days after treatment.
By retarding thrombus formation, the agents might additionally prove helpful in controlling restenosis. 

Restenosis could potentially be avoided by targeting a different integrin: xxx , which appears rather prominently on smooth muscle cells after blood vessels are injured.
Because this integrin seems to promote the survival and migration of these cells, blockade of its activity might limit the cells' contribution to restenosis.

A Role in More Diseases

Other disorders involving undesirable activity by integrins include osteoporosis, a growing list of infectious disorders and cancer.
Osteoporosis is familiar as the loss of bone, and attendant increased risk of fracture, that occurs with age, particularly in women.
The condition can result from the relative overactivity of cells that bind to bone and degrade it.
The binding in question occurs via the xxx integrin, and so researchers are testing whether decoys that will essentially shield the Integrins might prevent the destructive cells from adhering to bone.

In the case of infections, certain microbes apparently enter cells at least in part by latching onto integrins.
These organisms include ones that produce flulike ailments, meningitis, diarrhea and paralysis.
Such findings suggest the integrins that are involved could make good targets for new drug therapies.

Integrins clearly participate in cancer as well, but the details of what they do are incomplete.
Cancer arises when cells evade the usual controls on cell division and migration; 
they then reproduce uncontrollably and gain the ability to invade local tissue and to metastasize- that is, to migrate to distant sites and to grow in unfamiliar territory.
Researchers have found that various tumor types stop producing specific integrins, display integrins that their tissues do not normally make or alter their distribution of the usual integrins. 
The consequences of these changes are not always obvious, but the display of certain Integrins is thought to sometimes facilitate migration by cells that normally would not travel. 

Integrins can also promote the formation of blood vessels (angiogenesis) in tumors.
These vessels nourish the tumors and provide access routes into the bloodstream for metastatic cells [see "How Cancer Spreads," by Erkki Ruoslahti, and "Fighting Cancer by Attacking Its Blood Supply," by Judah Folkman; Scientific American, September 1996].
To construct new blood vessels, proliferating endothelial cells must form adhesive attachments to one another and to the matrix around them.
Increasing evidence implies that the xxx integrin appears in quantity on endothelial cells that are forming new blood vessels and that this display keeps the proliferating cells from dying.
For instance, compounds that impair endothelial cell adhesion via the xxx integrininduce improperly proliferating endothelial cells to kill themselves.
The agents also inhibit the growth of new blood vessels and produce tumor regression in animals, presumably by cutting off the supply of blood to the tumor.

On the basis of such results, researchers are investigating the value of xxx inhibitors as anticancer agents.
The same compounds or related ones may also help patients suffering from proliferative retinopathy, a complication of diabetes in which the retina sprouts weak and leaky blood vessels that can destroy the retina and cause blindness.
Such drugs should leave healthy blood vessels intact, because the xxx integrin is not displayed abundantly on the endothelial cells of vessels that are no longer growing.

Most proposed therapies for adhesion-related disorders aim to interdict attachment of integrins to their extracellular partners.
But agents that increased such attachments could facilitate the migration of healthy skin cells into severely injured skin and so could potentially hasten wound healing.
Similar products might be incorporated into artificial matrices, to guide the growth of new, organic tissues that will replace ones damaged by disease, invasive treatments or injury.

Those of us who have studied integrins over the past decade are delighted that therapies based on our research are becoming available.
Most of us, however, are just as enthralled by the basic science aspects of the work: the effort to better understand how integrins and other adhesion molecules control so many different aspects of development and physiology.
Whether we entered the field by accident or design, we have been treated to an electrifying scientific experience.
We each started with a relatively narrow focus and have been informed and dazzled by the breadth of the effects produced by integrins and other adhesion molecules.
The rapid progress that has been made testifies to the advances that can be achieved when scientists interested in different research areas put their minds together.

Figure 1

CELL has been colored to reveal the actin fibers ( tan ) in its internal scaffolding and the integrins ( orange ) that link the scaffolding to the protein fibronectin in the external matrix 

Figure 2

INTEGRINS ( orange ) span cell membranes

They hold a cell in place by attaching at one end to molecules of the extracellular matrix (or to molecules on other cells) and at the other end to the cell's own scaffolding, or cytoskeleton.
They connect to this scaffolding through a highly organized aggregate of molecules-a focal adhesion-that includes such cytoskeletal components as actin, talin, vinculin and xxx .
Integrins have also recently been found to relay messages from the matrix into the cell.
The process seems to involve stimulation of dedicated signaling components ( magenta ) in focal adhesions. (The configuration of focal adhesions can vary.)

Figure 1

MATURATION OF CELLS and embryos requires attachment of cells to the extracellular matrix, often via integrins

Mammary epithelial cells removed from mice and grown in a culture dish lose their normal shape and the ability to produce milk proteins ( top left ); they regain their structure ( bottom left ) and function only when specific matrix molecules are provided.
A normal mouse embryo began to form a placenta ( top right ) by its ninth day of gestation.
An embryo lacking the xxx integrin, however, did not form a placenta ( bottom right ) and soon died.

Figure 4

THROMBUS FORMATION, or blood clotting, occurs when blood vessels are injured

The process begins as small cells called platelets attach to the matrix that becomes exposed when the endothelial cells lining blood vessels are disrupted (a).
This attachment then activates quiescent xxx integrin molecules (b), causing them to adhere to circulating proteins-including fibrinogen, which forms bridges to additional platelets (c).
Together the cells and proteins ultimately form a network of cells and fibers dense enough to plug the injury and prevent blood loss until the wound can be repaired ( drawing below ).

Figure 5

DEFENSE AGAINST INFECTION requires white blood cells (leukocytes) to leave the bloodstream and migrate into damaged or diseased tissues ( drawing at far left and details above )

First the leukocytes adhere weakly to endothelial cells through interaction with molecules called selectins (a) and then roll along the blood vessel wall (b).
Next, integrins (usually containing xxx or xxx chains) on the white cells become activated (c) and adhere to ICAMs (intercellular adhesion molecules).
These attachments cause the leukocytes to stop moving and to flatten out.
The white cells then squeeze between endothelial cells (d), leave blood vessels and, using similar attachments, follow a trail of chemical attractants to the site of infection.

Figure 6

RETINA of a normal eye ( left ) is nourished by intact blood vessels, but the retina of a diabetic with proliferative retinopathy (right) contains a profusion of abnormal vessels that can damage the retina and cause blindness

Growth of new vessels requires abundant display of the xxx integrin by endothelial cells.
As the table at the right shows, this integrin is one of several now attracting the attention of drugmakers.

Figure 7

CELLS "WALK" from one site to another by forming and breaking integrin-mediated attachments to a matrix

After attaching to a matrix, they produce footlike extensions (a) and form new attachments at their front end (b). 
Next, they release the connections at the rear (c), which causes the back end to move forward.
Then the cycle begins anew (d).

Table 1

Some Integrins under Study as Potential Drug Targets

Integrin.
Cell Types Displaying Integrin .
Binding Partners.
Examples of Disorders Involving Integrin Adhesion.


xxx .
Platelets.
Fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, others .
Acute return of blood clots (abrupt closure) and later vessel occlusion (restenosis) after angioplasty has cleaned out a clogged artery.


xxx .
Endothelial cells.
Fibronectin, vitronectin, others .
Angiogenesis contributing to tumor progression and diabetic retinopathy.
Smooth muscle cells.
Same as above.
Restenosis.


xxx .
Various white blood cells.
Fibronectin, xxx .
Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as asthma and arthritis.


xxx .
Integrins.
Neutrophils.
ICAMs.
Reperfusion injury.
Various white blood cells.
Same as above.
Chronic inflammatory diseases.


Integrins contribute to a number of diseases.
The pharmaceutical industry is now attempting to develop therapies that will prevent selected integrins, such as those listed below, from adhering to their usual binding partners in the body.
