
CHAPTER 2 

Interlude I: &lsqb;The Techniques of Economic Analysis&rsqb; 

THE LAST PARAGRAPH of the preceding chapter points toward momentous problems, which will, under the heading of Sociology of Science, be touched upon in Chapter 4.
Now we break off our argument and turn aside in order to hunt two hares whose paths diverge sometimes in a disconcerting manner: on the one hand, it is necessary to define the relations of economics to some of the fields of tooled knowledge that have or have had influence upon it or have border zones in common with it [1] (ch. 3); on the other hand, it is convenient to use this opportunity to explain right now some of the concepts and principles that will govern our exposition of the history of economic analysis.
This will e one in the current chapter.

Let us begin in a thoroughly common-sense manner.
What distinguishes the 'scientific' economist from all the other people who think, talk, and write about economic topics is a command of techniques [2] that we class under three heads: history, statistics, and 'theory.' The three together make up what we shall call Economic Analysis. &lsqb;Later in this chapter, J. A. S. added to these three a fourth fundamental field, Economic Sociology.&rsqb; 

&lsqb;1 ECONOMIC HISTORY&rsqb; 

Of these fundamental fields, economic historyðwhich issues into and includes present-day factsðis by far the most important.
I wish to state right now that if, starting my work in economics afresh, I were told that I could study only one of the three but could have my choice, it would be economic history that I should choose.
And this on three grounds.
First, the subject matter of economics is essentially a unique process in historic time.
Nobody can hope to understand the economic phenomena of any, including the present, epoch who has not an adequate command of historical facts and an adequate amount of historical sense or of what may be described as historical experience. [3] 
Second, the historical report cannot be purely economic but must inevitably reflect also 'institutional' facts that are not purely economic: therefore it affords the best method for understanding how economic and non-economic facts are related to one another and how the various social sciences should be related to one another. [4] 
Third, it is, I believe, the fact that most of the fundamental errors currently committed in economic analysis are due to lack of historical experience more often than to any other shortcoming of the economist's equipment.
History must of course be understood to include fields that have acquired different names as a consequence of specialization, such as prehistoric reports and ethnology (anthropology). [5] 

Two ominous consequences of the argument above should be noticed at once.
First, since history is an important source -though not the only one- of the economist's material and since, moreover, the economist himself is a product of his own and all preceding time, economic analysis and its results are certainly affected by historical relativity [6] and the only question is how much.
No worth-while answer to this question can be got by philosophizing about it, but it will be one of our major concerns to work one out by detailed investigation.
This is why sketches of 'the spirit of the times' and, in particular, of the politics of each period will preface our exposition of the economic analysis in the subsequent Parts.
Second, we have to face the fact that, economic history being part of economics, the historian's techniques are passengers in the big bus that we call economic analysis.
Derivative knowledge is always unsatisfactory.
Hence, even economists who are not economic historians themselves and who merely read the historical reports written by others must understand how these reports came into being or else they will not be able to appraise the real meaning.
We shall not be able to live up to the program that follows from this.
In principle however let us remember: Latin palaeography, for instance, is one of the techniques of economic analysis.

&lsqb;2 STATISTICS&rsqb; 

It stands to reason that for economics, statistics, that is, the statistical figure or series of figures must be of vital importance.

In practice this has been recognized at least since the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries when a large part of the work of the Spanish políticos, for example, consisted in the collection and interpretation of statistical figures- not to mention the English econometricians, who were called political arithmeticians, and their fellow workers in France, Germany, and Italy. [1] 
We need statistics not only for explaining things but also in order to know precisely what there is to explain.

But a comment has to be added that is analogous to the comment made in the preceding paragraph on the subject of history.
It is impossible to understand statistical figures without understanding how they have been compiled.
It is equally impossible to extract information from them or to understand the information that specialists extract for the rest of us without understanding the methods by which this is done-and the epistemological backgrounds of these methods.
Thus, an adequate command of modern statistical methods is a necessary (but not a sufficient) condition for preventing the modern economist from producing nonsense, though very much more so in some fields than in others: our stake in these methods is too great for us to leave judgment on the virtues or shortcomings, say, of the variate-difference method to specialists even if they were unanimous about it.
Again, we shall not be able to live up to the program that follows from this.
But again, we shall recognize, in principle at least: statistical methods are part of the tools of economic analysis even when not specially devised to meet its particular needs; and Jacques Bernoulli's Ars conjectandi or Laplace's Théorie analytique stand in the history of many sciences but they have their places also in the history of our own. [2] 

&lsqb;3 'THEORY'&rsqb; 

The third fundamental field is 'theory.' This term carries many meanings but only two of them are relevant so far as our own usage in this book is concerned.
The first and less important one makes theories synonymous with Explanatory Hypotheses.
Such hypotheses are of course essential ingredients of historiography and statistics also.
For instance, even the most fiercely factual historian, economic or other, can hardly avoid forming an explanatory hypothesis or theory, or several explanatory hypotheses or theories, on the origins of towns.
The statistician must form a hypothesis or theory, say, on the joint distribution of the stochastic variables that enter into his problem.
All that needs to be said about this is that it is an error -though a widespread one- to believe that the sole or main business of the economic theorist consists in formulating such hypotheses (some may wish to add: out of the blue sky).

Economic theory does something entirely different.
It cannot indeed, any more than can theoretical physics, do without simplifying schemata or models that are intended to portray certain aspects of reality and take some things for granted in order to establish others according to certain rules of procedure.
So far as our present argument is concerned, the things (propositions) that we take for granted may be called indiscriminately either hypotheses or axioms or postulates or assumptions or even principles, [1] and the things (propositions) that we think we have established by admissible procedure are called theorems.
Of course a proposition may figure in one argument as a postulate and in another as a theorem.
Now, hypotheses of this kind are also suggested by facts- they are framed with an eye to observations made- but in strict logic they are arbitrary creations of the analyst. [2] 
They differ from the hypotheses of the first kind in that they do not embody final results of research that are supposed to be interesting for their own sake, but are mere instruments or tools framed for the purpose of establishing interesting results.
Moreover, framing them is no more all the economic theorist does than framing statistical hypotheses is all that the statistical theorist or in fact any theorist does.
Just as important is the devising of the other gadgets by which results may be extracted from the hypotheses -all the concepts (such as 'marginal rate of substitution,' 'marginal productivity,' 'multiplier,' 'accelerator'), relations between concepts, and methods of handling these relations, all of which have nothing hypothetical about them. [3] 
And it is the sum total of such gadgets -inclusive of strategically useful assumptions- which constitutes economic theory.
In Mrs.
Robinson's unsurpassably felicitous phrase, economic theory is a box of tools.

The rationale of this conception of economic theory is very simple and the same as in all other departments of science.
Experience teaches us that the phenomena of a given class - economic, biological, mechanical, electrical, and what not- are indeed individual occurrences each of which, as it occurs, reveals peculiarities of its own.
But experience also teaches us that these individual occurrences have certain properties or aspects in common and that tremendous economy of mental effort may be realized if we deal with the properties or aspects, and with the problems they raise, once and for all.
For some purposes it is indeed necessary to analyze every individual case of pricing in an individual market, every case of income formation, every individual business cycle, every international transaction, and so on.
But even where this is necessary we discover that we are using, in each case, concepts that occur in the analysis of all.
Next we discover that all cases, or at least large sets of individual cases, display similar features which, and the implications of which may be treated for all of them together by means of general schemata o pricing, income formation, cycles, international transactions' and so on.
And finally we discover that these schemata are not independent of one another but related, so that there is advantage in ascending to a still higher level o 'generalizing abstraction' on which we construct a composite instrument o engine or organon of economic analysis - though not the only one, as we have seen- which functions formally in the same way' whatever the economic problem to which we may turn [4] it.
Richard Cantillon's work is the first in which awareness of this last truth is clearly discernible' though economists took over a century to realize all its possibilities - Léon Walras was in fact the first to do so (see below Part IV, ch. 6' sec. 5b).

Although it is neither possible nor desirable for us to embark upon an epistemology of economics and although some of the topics pertaining to that field will receive attention both in the subsequent chapters of this Part and m all the subsequent Parts, it will be helpful to insert here a few additional remarks in the hope that they will do something to scale down possible barriers between myself and my readers.

First, then, a qualification should be added to the preceding argument about the nature and functions of economic theory.
This argument ran in terms which are applicable, substantially at least, to all sciences that have any all-purpose apparatus of analysis.
But there are limits to this parallelism and the most important of them are represented by the two following facts.
Economics lacks the benefits that physics derives from laboratory experiments -when economists talk about experimenting they mean something quite different from experimenting under laboratory conditions- but enjoys instead a source of information that is denied to physics, namely, man's extensive knowledge of the meanings of economic actions.
This source of information is also a source of controversies that will bother us repeatedly on our journey.
But its existence can hardly be denied.
Now, when we speak, for example, of motives that are supposed to actuate individuals or groups, our source of information may be roughly identified with knowledge of psychic processes, conscious or subconscious, which it would be absurd not to use, although, as I shall never cease to emphasize, this is not the same thing as trespassing upon the field of professional psychology- any more than stating the 'law' of decreasing returns from land implies trespassing upon the realm of physics.
There is, however, also another way of interpreting our knowledge of meanings which is more akin to logic.
If I state, for example, that -under a number of conditions- instantaneous gains of a firm will be maximized at the output at which marginal cost equals marginal revenue (the latter equaling price in the case of pure competition), I may be said to be formulating the logic of the situation and a result that is true, just as is a rule of general logic, independently of whether or not anyone ever acts in conformity to it.
This means that there is a class of economic theorems that are logical (not, of course, ethical or political) ideals or norms.
And they evidently differ from another class of economic theorems that are directly based upon observations, for example, on observations as to how far expectations of employment opportunity affect workmen's expenditure on consumers' goods or how variations in wages affect the marriage rate.
It would no doubt be possible to assimilate both types of theory by interpreting the logical norms also as 'purifying' generalizations from observational data, if need be, from observations that are subconsciously stored up by common experience.

On the whole, however, it seems better not to do so but to recognize frankly that we have, or think we have, the ability to understand meanings and to represent the implications of these meanings by appropriately constructed schemata.

[1] This clumsy phrasing has been chosen in order to avoid the unrealistic suggestion of sharp and permanent border lines.

[2] The word 'technique' should be understood in a very wide sense: mere command o t e facts of some field, systematically acquired and such as to be beyond the range of knowledge than can be gained by practicing in that field, is sufficient to constitute scientific level, even though cultivation of the field does not require any elaborate methods that the layman could not understand. 

[3] This does not render 'theory,' in the sense to be explained below,either impossible or uselessðeconomic history itself needs its help.

[4] 4 Owing to the unreliability of 'theories' on this subject, I personally believe the study of history to be not only the best but the only method for this purpose. 

[5] In this book unless warning to the contrary is given, anthropology means physical anthropology only.
Above it has the usual meaning which makes it synonymous with the study of primitive tribes, their behavior patterns, language, and social institutions.

We call this ethnology.

[6] This is one of several meanings of that much misused word, relativity.
Here we mean by it no more than (a) that we cannot use more material than we have and that in consequence some or all of our results may not stand up in the light of further experience (a fact that must of course be duly allowed for in the interpretation of the economists of the past)- and (b) that economists' interests in the problems of their epoch and also their attitudes to these problems condition their general views on economic phenomena.
See ch. 4.
This has nothing to do with philosophic relativism.

[1] It is therefore only as a curiosum that we notice the fact that the simple and apparently unchallengeable statement in the first sentence of the paragraph above has been staunchly denied by some economists to this day.

[2] Lest the reader should throw up his hands in despair at the range of competence which the historical and statistical requirements seem to indicate, let me point out that these requirements can be easily fulfilled by every graduate student who has had a tolerably good undergraduate training in history or mathematics.
Only the student without any training in either will have to realize that, as an all-round economist, he is suffering from a handicap and that he can move with assurance only within narrow portions of the science unless he is prepared to make up for his deficiencies by a heroic effort for which one or two years of graduate study are altogether inadequate.
But it also takes more than that to become a scientifically competent lawyer or engineer or doctor.

[1] By 'principle' we shall mean in this book any statement that we (or the authors under discussion) do not propose to challenge.
But it may be a proposition that we (they) have established as well as a proposition that we (they) have postulated or assumed.
The same holds for the objectionable term 'law,' the emergence and use or misuse of which will have to be carefully considered: we speak of the 'law' of decreasing returns or of Keynes's 'law' of the propensity to consume, which are assumptions, but also of the Marxist 'law' of the falling rate of profit, which is a proposition that Marx thought he had established.

[2] To use J. H. Poincaré's simile: tailors can cut suits as they please; but of course they try to cut them to fit their customers.

[3] Example: theoretical mechanics proceeds upon a number ofassumptions (or hypotheses in this sense); but evidently the list of these assumptions is not the whole of theoretical mechanics but only constitutes, where explicitly assembled, its first chapter.

[4] The statement above is a brief rendering of E. Mach's doctrine that every (theoretical) science is a device for effecting economy of effort (Denkokonomie).

CHAPTER 4 

The Sociology of Economics 

WE HAVE ALREADY referred to a department of science that we called the Science of Sciences (Wissenschaftslehre).
This science, starting from logic and to some extent also from epistemology, treats of the general rules of procedure in use in the other individual sciences.

But there is another science about science which is called the Sociology of Science ( Wissenssoziologie ) [1] and treats of science as a social phenomenon.

That is, it analyzes the social factors and processes that produce the specifically scientific type of activity, condition its rate of development, determine its direction toward certain subjects rather than other equally possible ones, foster some methods of procedure in preference to others, set up the social mechanisms that account for success or failure of lines of research or individual performances, raise or depress the status and influence of scientists (in our sense) and their work, and so on.
Our emphasis upon the fact that the workers in the fields of tooled knowledge are apt to form distinct vocational groups qualifies particularly well for conveying to the reader the reasons why, and the extent to which, science constitutes a proper subject of sociological research.
Our interest in this subject is of course confined, primarily ct least, to the topics that may usefully figure in an introduction to a history of economic analysis.
Of these the problem of ideology is by far the most important and will be dealt with first (1); under a second heading we shall consider the motive forces of scientific endeavor and the mechanisms of scientific development (2); and finally we shall discuss some topics concerning the personnel of science in general and economics in particular (3).

1 IS THE HISTORY OF ECONOMICS A HISTORY OF IDEOLOGIES? 

&lsqb;(a) Special Nature of 'Economic Laws.'&rsqb; The historical or 'evolutionary' nature of the economic process unquestionably limits the scope of general concepts and of general relations between them ('economic laws') that economists may be able to formulate.
There is indeed no sense in denying, a priori, as has been done sometimes, that any such concepts or relations can be formulated at all.
In particular it is not necessary that the concepts we use in the study of social groups should be familiar to the members of these groups themselves: the fact, if it be a fact, that the concept of income was not familiar to the people of the Middle Ages before the fourteenth century is no reason for not using it in an analysis of their economy. [1] 
But it is true that 'economic laws' are much less stable than are the 'laws' of any physical science, that they work out differently in different institutional conditions, and that neglect of this fact has been responsible for many an aberration.
It is also true that whenever we attempt to interpret human attitudes, especially attitudes of people far removed from us in time or culture, we risk misunderstanding them not only if we crudely substitute our own attitudes for theirs, but also if we do our best to penetrate into the working of their minds.

All this is made much worse than it would be otherwise by the fact that the analyzing observer himself is the product of a given social environment -and of his particular location in this environment- that conditions him to see certain things rather than others' and to see them in a certain light.
And even this is not all: environmental factors may even endow the observer with a subconscious craving to see things in a certain light.
This brings us up to the problem of ideological bias in economic analysis.

Modern psychology and psychotherapy have made us familiar with a habit of our minds that we call rationalization. [2] 
This habit consists in comforting ourselves and impressing others by drawing a picture of ourselves, our motives, our friends, our enemies, our vocation, our church, our country, which may have more to do with what we like them to be than with what they are.
The competitor who is more successful than we are ourselves is likely to owe his success to tricks that we despise.
As likely as not, the leader of a party not our own is a charlatan.
The beloved girl is an angel exempt from human frailties.
The enemy country is the home of monsters, our own the home of wholly admirable heroes.
And so on.
The importance of this habit for the health and happiness of the normal mind is obvious [3] and so is the importance of a correct diagnosis of its verbal manifestations.

&lsqb;(b) The Marxian Exposition of Ideological Bias.l Half a century before the full importance of this phenomenon was professionally recognized and put to use, Marx and Engels discovered it and used their discovery in their criticisms of the 'bourgeois' economics of their time.
Marx realized that men's ideas or systems of ideas are not, as historiography is still prone to assume uncritically, the prime movers of the historical process, but form a 'superstructure' on more fundamental factors, as will be explained at the proper place in our narrative.
Marx realized further that the ideas or systems of ideas that prevail at any given time in any given social group are, so far as they contain propositions about facts and inferences from facts, likely to be vitiated for exactly the same reasons that also vitiate a man's theories about his own individual behavior.
That is to say, people's ideas are likely to glorify the interests and actions of the classes that are in a position to assert themselves and therefore are likely to draw or to imply pictures of them that may be seriously at variance with the truth.
Thus, the medieval knights fancied themselves as protectors of the weak and defenders of the Christian faith, whereas their actual behavior and, still more, other factors that had produced and kept in existence the social structure of their world are bound to look very different to an observer of a different time and class.

Such systems of ideas Marx called ideologies. [4] 
And his contention was that a large part of the economics of his time +1>as nothing but the ideology of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie.
The value of this great contribution to our insight into the processes of history and into the meaning of social science is impaired but not destroyed by three blemishes, which it is as well to notice at once.

First, while Marx was so much alive to the ideological character of systems of ideas with which he was not in sympathy, he was completely blind to the ideological elements present in his own.
But the principle of interpretation involved in his concept of ideology is perfectly general.
Obviously we cannot say: everywhere else is ideology; [5] we alone stand on the rock of absolute truth.
Laborist ideologies are neither better nor worse than are any others.

Second' the Marxist analysis of ideological systems of thought reduces them to emulsions of class interests which are in turn defined in exclusively economic terms.
According to Marx the ideologies of capitalist society are, to put it crudely, glorifications of the interests of what he styled the capitalist class, whose interests are made to turn on the hunt for pecuniary profits.
Ideologies that do not glorify the behavior of capitalist man in business but something else, for instance the national character and behavior, must hence always be reducible, however indirectly, to those economic interests of the dominant class.
This however is not implied in the principle of ideological interpretation but constitutes an additional and much more doubtful theory.
The principle itself implies only two things: that ideologies are superstructures erected on and produced by, the realities of the objective social structure below them, and that they tend to reflect these realities in a characteristically biased manner.
Whether or not these realities can be completely described in purely economic terms is another question.
Without entering upon it here, we merely record the fact that we are going to attach a much wider meaning to the concept of Ideological Influence.
Social location undoubtedly is a powerful factor in shaping our minds.
But this does not amount to saying that our minds are exclusively shaped by the economic elements in our class position or that, even so far as this is the case, they are exclusively shaped by a well-defined class or group interest. [6] 

Third, Marx and especially the majority of his followers assumed too readily that statements which display ideological influence are ipso facto condemned thereby.
But it cannot be emphasized too strongly that, like individual rationalizations, ideologies a re no t lies .

I t must be added that statements of fact that enter into them are not necessarily erroneous.
The temptation is great to avail oneself of the opportunity to dispose at one stroke of a whole body of propositions one does not like, by the simple device of calling it an ideology.
This device is no doubt very effective, as effective as are attacks upon an opponent's personal motives.
But logically it is inadmissible.
As pointed out already, explanation, however correct, of the reasons why a man says what he says tells us nothing about whether it is true or false.
Similarly statements that proceed from an ideological background are open to suspicion, but they may still be perfectly valid.
Both Galileo and his opponents may have been swayed by ideologies.
That does not prevent us from saying that he was 'right.' But what logical warrant have we for saying so?
Is there any means of locating, recognizing, and possibly eliminating the ideologically vitiated elements in economic analysis?
And does enough remain when we have done so?

It will be understood that our answers, though illustrated by examples, will for the moment be provisional and that the validity or otherwise of the principles I am about to formulate can be judged only by their applications in this hook as a whole.
But before we embark upon this task we must clarify a preliminary matter.

Unfortunately we have to bar a fire escape by which some of the strongest exponents of the doctrine that economics, and in principle all science, is vitiated by ideological delusions have tried to escape from the apparently inevitable conclusion concerning the possibility 'of scientific truth.' Professor K. Mannheim taught that, though ideological delusion is the common fate of mankind, there are nevertheless 'detached intelligences,' floating freely in space, who enjoy the privilege of being exempt from this fate.

Slightly more realistically, everyone is a victim of ideological delusion except the modern radical intellectual who stands indeed upon the rock of truth, the unbiased judge of all things human.
Now, if anything can be called obvious in this field, it is the fact that this intellectual is just a bundle of prejudices that are in most cases held with all the force of sincere conviction.
But this apart' we cannot follow Mannheim down his fire escape because we have fully accepted the doctrine of the ubiquity of ideological bias and therefore cannot see anything else in the belief of some groups in their freedom from it but a particularly vicious part of their own system of delusions. [7] 
Now we turn to our task.

First, ideological bias, as defined above by our amended version of the Marxist definition, is obviously not the only danger that threatens economic analysis.
In particular there are two others that should be mentioned specifically because they are easily confused with ideological bias.
One is possible tampering with facts or with rules of procedure by Special Pleaders.
All we have to say about this has been said already: here I only wish to warn the reader that special pleading is not the same thing as ideologically vitiated analyzing.
Another danger proceeds from the inveterate habit of economists to pass value judgments upon the processes they observe.

An economist's value judgments often reveal his ideology but they are not his ideology: it is possible to pass value judgments upon irreproachably established facts and the relations between them, and it is possible to refrain from passing any value judgments upon facts that are seen in an ideologically deflected light.
We are not going to discuss the problem of value judgments here.
It will be more convenient to do so on other occasions, especially when I shall have to report upon a full-dress debate on the subject in Part IV, Chapter 4. [8] 

[1] &lsqb;J.
A. S. left space for this note but did not write it.
In Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (New York, 1950), p. 11, he explains the term Sociology of Knowledge as follows: 'The German word is Wissenssoziologie, and the best names to mention are those of Max Scheler and Karl Mannheim.

The latter's article on the subject in the German Dictionary of Sociology (Handlvorterbuch der Soziologie) can serve as an introduction.'&rsqb; 

[1] Let me make this quite clear.
Sociologists like Max Weber who stand for the interpretative method of social states or change-that is, who believe that it is our main or sole business to try to understand what things meant to the people concernedð may easily drift into the position that the use of any concepts not familiar to the people under study involves the error of assuming that their minds functioned just like ours.
Now this error may be involved but it need not be: using a concept that carries meaning for us but not to the people that we observe is one thing; postulating that the concept carried meaning also for the latter is another thing.
We need not go to primitive tribes in order to illustrate this: if, in terms of concepts of our own, we formulate the conditions for maximizing profits, we need not assume that the businessman himself uses these concepts; our 'theory' is perfectly meaningful even if we know that he does not.

[2] 'Rationalization' in the sense I am about to explain must be carefully distinguished from other meanings of the same word, and especially these two: (1) We sometimes speak of rationalization when we mean action that aims at improving something, e.g. an industrial concern, to make it conform to standards of which consulting specialists approve. (2) In research work we sometimes speak of rationalization when we mean the attempt to link a set of empirical findings to some theoretical principle that is to explain them.
Thus, we say that we rationalize observed business behavior by the principle of profit maximization.
These meanings have nothing to do with the one under discussion.

[3] This seems to me the essential point about rationalizations: they supply a sort of self- defense for our psychic organisms and make many a life bearable that would not be so without them.
Let me add, however, that there is also another side to them that accounts for their role in psychoanalytic practice. 

[4] The term is of French origin and at first meant simply the analysis of ideas, especially with reference to Condillac's theory.
Occasionally it seems to have been used in much the same sense as the term Moral Philosophy, i.e. as roughly equivalent to social science.
In this sense it was used by Destutt de Tracy.
Napoleon I also used it but in a different sense that carried a derogatory connotation: he described as idéologues those opponents of his government, such as Lafayette, whom he considered unrealistic dreamers.

[5] &lsqb;I.
A. S. put a pencil note 'delusion?' beside this reference to ideology and the one in the next to the last sentence in the paragraph above.&rsqb; 

[6] &lsqb;This problem is touched upon at intervals throughout the History.&rsqb;

[7] Some groups, like bureaucracies, are more given to this ideology, which among other things involves the clearly ideological denial of any group interest of their own or at least of its influence on the policies that they originate or assist in shaping.
This may be used as a first example of the influence of ideologies upon analysis.
For this ideology of bureaucracies is an important factor in the unscientific habit of economists of using a clearly ideological theory of the state that raises the latter into a superhuman agency for the public good and neglects all the facts about the realities of public administration that modem political science provides.

[8] &lsqb;Unfortunately, there is only an unfinished version of this chapter, written in 1943.
It was one of the sections that J. A. S. had taken out to rewrite and amplify.&rsqb; 

CHAPTER 2 

The Scholastic Doctors and the Philosophers of Natural Law 

1 THE GREAT GAP 

The Eastern Empire survived the Western for another thousand years, kept going by the most interesting and most successful bureaucracy the world has ever seen.
Many of the men who shaped policies in the offices of the Byzantine emperors were of the intellectual cream of their times.
They dealt with a host of legal, monetary, commercial, agrarian, and fiscal problems.
We cannot help feeling that they must have philosophized about them.
If they did, however, the results have been lost.
No piece of reasoning that would have to be mentioned here has been preserved.

In the Germanic states of the West, similar problems arose even before the time of Charlemagne, and we know fairly well from literary sources as well as well as from documents how they dealt with them.
But Charlemagne's vast empire presented problems of internal administration and international economic relations that had been unknown to any Germanic ruler before him.
Practically: wisdom, however, not inferior to that of any other age, is all that his measures reflect.
The historians and philosophers who adorned his court touched upon economic questions incidentally, if at all. [1] 
So far as our subject is concerned we may safely leap over 500 years to the epoch of St.
Thomas Aquinas (1225-74), whose Summa Theologica [2] is in the history of thought what the south western spire of the Cathedral of Chartres is in the history of architecture.

2 FEUDALISM AND SCHOLASTICISM 

St. Thomas' life extended over the crest of feudal civilization.

This term suggests the idea of a particular type of warrior society, namely, of a society dominated by a warrior stratum that was organized, on the principle of vassal age, in a hierarchy of fief-endowed lords and knights.
From the standpoint of this hierarchy of warriors, the old distinction between men of free status and men of unfree status had lost much of its original significance.
What mattered was not whether a man was free or not, but whether he was a knight or not.
Even the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire of German Nationality -to use the official phrase- who was in theory recognized as the feudal overlord of all Christianity, primarily was, and felt himself to be, a knight; and even the unfree man was a knight as soon as he had got hold of a horse and arms and had learned how to use them -which was at first a very simple matter, though in St.
Thomas' age it had become a highly skilled occupation.
This warrior class enjoyed unrivaled power and prestige, and hence impressed the stamp of its own cultural pattern upon the civilization of feudal times.

The economic base of this social pyramid consisted of the dependent peasants and manorial craftsmen on whose work the warriors lived.
We thus seem to behold what at first sight looks like a structural unit in the sense that the phrase Social Pyramid is indeed meant to convey.
But this picture is quite unrealistic.
Societies, with the possible exception of primitive tribes and fullfledged socialism, are never structural units, and half the problems they present arise from the fact that they are not.
The society of feudal times cannot be described in terms of knights and peasants any more than the society of capitalist times can be described in terms of capitalists and proletarians.
Roman industry, commerce, and finance had not been destroyed everywhere.
Even where they had been destroyed or where they had never existed, they -and consequently classes of bourgeois character- had developed or developed again before St. Tomas' day.

In many places these clases had outgrown the framework of the feudal organization and, helped by the fact that a well- fortified town was normally impregnable to the knights' arts of warfere, they had successfully challenged the rule of the feudal lords -the most comspicuous instance being the victoriuous resistance of the towns of Lombardy.
As a historical reality, therefore, feudalism means the symbiosis of two essentially different and largely though not wholly, antagonistic social systems.

But there was another factor of nonfeudal origin and character that the warrior class failed to absorb or to conquer, for us the most important of all, the Roman Catholic Church.
We cannot enter into a discussion of the extremely intricate relations of the medieval Church with the feudal powers.
The one essential point to grasp is that the Church was not simply an organ of feudal society but an organism distinct from feudal society that always remained a power in its own right.
However closely allied with, or dependent upon, feudal kings and lords it may at times have been, however near it may have come to defeat and to being harnessed into the service of the warrior class, it never resigned its own authority and never became the instrument of that of any other class.
Since the Church was always able not only to assert itself but also to wage successful war upon the feudal powers, this fact should be too obvious to require explicit statement, were it not that historiography, inspired by a popular version of Marxian sociology, may easily create the impression -to put it in the crudest possible way- that medieval thought was merely the ideology of a landholding warrior class, verbalized by its chaplains.
This impression would be wrong not only from the standpoint of those who refuse to accept the Marxian sociology of ideas, but also from the standpoint of Marx himself, even if we chose to interpret the Catholic system of thought as an ideology, it would still remain the ideology of the clergy and never merge with that of the warrior class.
It is important to keep this in mind because of the practivally complete monopoly of learning that the Catholic Church enjoyed until the Renaissance.
This monopoly was due primarily to the spiritual authority of the Church.
But it was greatly reinforced by the conditios of those ages in which there was neither room nor security for proffessional scholars except within a convent.
In consequence, almost al 'intellectuals' of those times were either monks or friars.
Let us briefly consider some implications of this.

All those monks and friars spoke the same unclassical Latin; they heard the same Mass wherever they went; they were formed by an educational that was the same in all countries; they professed the same system of fundamental beliefs; and they all acknowledged the supreme authority of the Pope, which was essentially international: their country was Christendom, their state was the Church.
But this is not all.
Their internationalizing influence was strengthened by the fact that feudal society itself was international.
Not only the Pope's but also the Emperor's authority was international in principle and, to some varying degree, in fact.
The old Roman Empire and that of Carlemagne were no mere reminiscences.
People were familiar with the idea of a temporal as well as of a spiritual superstate.
National divisions did not mean to them that they came to mean during the sixteenth century; nothing in the whole range of Dante's political ideas is so striking as is the complete absence of the nationalist angle.
The result was the emergence of an essentially international civilization and an international republic of scholars that was no phrase but a living reality.
St. Thomas was an Italian and John Duns Scotus was a Scotsman, but both taught in Paris and Cologne without encountering any of the difficulties that they would have encountered in the age of airplanes.

In fact as well as in principle, practically everybody who wished to do so was allowed to enter a monastic order and also to join the ranks of the secular clergy.
But advancement within the Church was open o everybody in principle only, since the claims of members of warrior-class families in fact absorbed the greater part of bishopries and abbotcies.
But the man without connection was never entirely excluded from the higher dignities, not even from the highest; and, what is much more important for us, he was not debarred from becoming an idea-shaping and policy-shaping 'keyman'.

The regular clergy (the monks) and the friars supplied, as it were, the general staff of the Chuch.
And in the monasteries men of all classes met on equal terms.
Naturally, the intellectual atmosphere was often charged with social and political radicalism, though this was, of course, much more the case at some times than at others and much more with the friars than with the regular monks.
In the literature that we are going to survey we get this radicalism in a highly rarefied form but we do get it.

But how can a radical -hence also critical- attitude of mind be imputed to a social group whose members were bound to obey the dictates of a supreme and absolute authority? This apparent paradox is easily resolved.
The lives and the faith of the monks and friars were indeed subject to authority that was, in theory at least, absolute and spoke immutable truth.
But beyond the sphere of discipline and fundamental religious belief -beyond the matters that were de fide- that authority did not undertake to direct their thought, nor did it prescribe results. [1] 
In particular, it had not, in general, any motive for doing so in the department of political and economic thought, that is to say, for compelling the clerical intellectuals to expound and defend or to represent as immutable any given temporal order of things.
The Church was judge of all things human; conflict with temporal authority was an ever-present possibility and very often the actual fact; the monastic orders were important instruments of Papal authority: these were no reasons for preventing them from looking upon temporal institutions as historically mutable works of man.
I am far from wishing to belittle the importance of Christian ideals and precepts per se.
But we need not invoke them in order to realize that monastic subordination to authority in matters of faith and discipline was compatible with extensive freedom of opinion in all other matters.
We must go even further.
Not only did the monks' sociological location -outside, as it were, of the class structure- make for an attitude of detached criticism of many things; there also was a power behind them that was in a position to protect that freedom.
So far as treatment of political and economic problems is concerned, the clerical intellectual of that age was not more but less exposed to interference from political authority and from 'pressure groups' than was the laical intellectual of later ages.

The indictment that unquestioning acceptance of ecclesiastic authority invalidated the reasoning of those monastic scholars from a scientific standpoint is thus seen to be without foundation.
We have, however, still to consider a particular form of it.
The analytic nature of their reasoning has often been denied on the ground that their arguments can have been only arguments from authority: subject to the authority of the Pope as they were, they had no other method left of establishing or refuting a proposition than to adduce for or against it literary authorities recognized by that supreme authority.
But this is not so.
The point can be cleared up by a reference to St.
Thomas.
He taught indeed that authority was of decisive importantce in matters involving Revelation -namely, the authority of thos to whom the revelations had been made- but he also taught that in everything else (and this includes, of course, the whole field of economics) any argument from authority was 'extremely weak'. [2] 
With the monopoly of learning went the monopoly of 'higher' teaching.
In the schools that were founded from the seventh century on, by temporal and spiritual lords, it was clerics who taught the tatters of Graeco-Roman science as well as theology and philosophical doctrines of their own -great teachers like Abelard attracted students and caused, occasionally, a lot of trouble for the controlling authorities.
In some cases from these schools, in others independently, the self-governing 'universities' developed in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries -incorporated associations [3] of either teachers, as in Paris, or students, as in Bologna, who before long grouped themselves into theological, philosophical, legal, and medical 'faculties'.
At first, princes and bishops had no more to do with them than what was implied in the granting of corporative privileges and in religious supervision.
Accordingly, the universities enjoyed a large measure of freedom and independence; they gave more scope to the individual teacher than do the mechanized universities of today; they were a meeting ground of all classes of society; and they were essentially international.
But from the fourteenth century on, government foundations became increasingly frequent.
Governments also acquired control of previously independent institutions.
Eventually, this changed everything.
Government influence not only made for the assertion of purely utilitarian aims but also Lor restriction of freedom, particularly, of course, in matters of political doctrine.
But, precisely because of the power that stood behind the clerical teachers, the universities he&rsqb;d their own fairly well until the religious split in the sixteenth century.

The opportunities offered by the universities naturally reinforced the old tendency of scholars to become teachers.
And since the public was then as prone as it is now to overemphasize the teaching at the expense of the production of what is being taught, medieval men of science were and are usually referred to as Schoolmen or Scholastics (doctores scholastici).
In order to disabuse himself of prevailing preconceptions, the reader had better see in these scholastic doctors simply college or university professors.
St. Thomas, then, was a professor.
His Summa Theologica was, as he informs us in the preface, conceived as a textbook for beginners (incipientes).

[1] The reader will find an instructive description of the intellectual situation of these times in M. L. W. Laistner, Thought and Letters in Western Europe, A.D. 500 to 900 (1931).

[2] New edition: S. Thomae Aquinatis, Doctoris Angelici, Summa Theologica, diligenter emendata de Rubeis, Billuart et Aliorum (Taurini, 1932).
The work, though unfinished has acquired unrivaled authority in the course of the centuries.
But it contains much that was revolutionary in St. Thomas' day, and shortly after his death a number of propositions were declared heretical, though only locally.
The canonization of the au thor in 1323 marks the turning of the tide.
It was not, however, until the sixteenth century that Catholic thought definitely rallied round his teaching.
Pope Leo XIII's encyclical Aeterni Patris (1879) made it the official teaching of the Church.

[1] Facts that apparently contradict this statement will be discussed later on.

[2] 'Nam licet locus ab auctoritate quae fundatur super ratione humana, sit infirmissimus...,' Summa 1 quaest.
I, art. 8, ad secundum.
Of course, the scholastics all quoted copiously, but so do we.
They deferred to authority -where they agreed with it- more than we do because they emphasized co-operative rather than individual opinion and attached great mportance to continuity of doctrine.
But this is all.

[3] Universitas originally meant nothing but corporation.
Many people enrolled merely for the sake of the legal privileges that membership in such a self- governing corporation entailed.
The meaning of universitas litterarum, which we attach to the term University, is of later origin.

CHAPTER 4 

The Econometricians and Turgot [1] 

THE INDIVIDUALS and groups to be discussed in this chapter were also Consultant Administrators, though not of the academic type, and some of them qualify in addition as philosophers of natural law.

Nevertheless, it was not only to relieve a chapter already overloaded with names that they have been reserved for separate treatment.
Except for the great figure of Turgot, which is to come in at the end of the chapter, they have something in common that makes it desirable to marshal them into a connected array - the spirit of numerical analysis.
They were Econometricians.
In fact their works illustrate to perfection what Econometrics is and what Econometricians are trying to do. [2] 

1 POLITICAL ARITHMETICK 

Repeatedly we have had occasion to observe that, with economists of all types but especially with the Consultant Administrators, factual investigation was the primary task that absorbed most of the available manpower and progressed more satisfactorily than did such 'theory' as there was.
This was so from the first, as such representative examples as Botero and Ortiz suffice to show.

However, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, a type of teaching developed, especially at the German universities, that specialized in purely descriptive presentation of the facts relevant to public administration.
A German professor, Hermann Conring (1606-81), is usually credited with having been the first to give lectures of this kind.
Another, Gottfried Achenwall (1719-72), who did the same, introduced the term Statistics.
These 'statistics' did not present figures primarily but rather non-numerical facts, and therefore had nothing to do, in the hands of those professors, with what we now call statistical method.
But the purpose of this information was much the same as that which our figures, treated by somewhat more refined methods, are calculated to serve.
The definition of statistics adopted as late as 1838 by the Royal Statistical Society -to give it its present title- still turned upon 'illustration of the conditions and prospects of society,' and thus covered the work of Conring and Achenwall quite well. [1] 
But -alas for the academic professionl -the really interesting development did not start from it.

The decisive impulse came from a small English group led and inspired by Sir William Petty. [2] 
The nature both of what he called Political Arithmetick and of his personal contribution to it has been formulated with unsurpassable fairness by one of his ablest followers, Davenant [3] (Of the Use of Political Arithmetick, Works, I, p. 128): 'By Political Arithmetick we mean the art of reasoning by figures upon things relating to government...
The art itself is undoubtedly very ancient. . . &lsqb;But Petty&rsqb; first gave it that name and brought it into rules and methods.' It will be seen that the 'methods' -which of course he did not invent either but, as it were, helped in to consciousness- do not consist in replacing reasoning by the assembling of facts.
Petty was no victim of the slogan: let facts speak for themselves.
Petty was first and last a theorist.
But he was one of those theorists for whom science is indeed measurement who forge analytic tools that will work with numerical facts and heartily despise any others; whose generalizations are the joint products of figures and reasoning that are never allowed to part company.
The relation of this procedure to that of the physical sciences - and to Newtonian principles, in particular- is so obvious as to make it necessary to emphasize that Petty displayed no propensity to borrow from them or even to strengthen his case by doubtful analogies with them.
He simply proposed 'instead of using only comparative and superlative words and intellectual arguments... to express &lsqb;himself&rsqb; in terms of number, weight and measure.' No less obvious is it that he was acutely aware of the polemical aspects of his methodological creed.
He was quite ready to fight for it and to start what would have been the first controversy on 'method.' But nobody attacked.
A few followed.
Many admired.
And the vast majority very quickly forgot.
That is to say, economists did not forget the name; they even remembered individual views of Petty's on various practical issues and some of his theories - precisely those that were couched in mere slogans.
It was the inspiring message, the suggestive program, which wilted in the wooden hands of the Scottish professor and was practically lost to most economists for 250 years: A. Smith took the safe side that was so congenial to him when he declared (Wealth, Book IV, ch. 5) that he placed not much faith in Political Arithmetick.

Not lost, however, was the impulse given to vital statistics and thus indirectly to statistics in general.
In this, the chief or even sole merit is now usually attributed to Graunt (see footnote 2 above).

In the next chapter we shall touch upon the controversies of that period on the subject of the growth (or decline!) of population which until the census of 180l was, in England at least, a matter of conjecture.
This, however, was only one of the problems that Graunt's or Petty's achievement put into a more promising shape by means of the 'bills of mortality' drawn from parish registers.

Computations of the chance of survival with application to insurance, of the influence of inoculation on longevity, of the relation of the sexes at birth, and of the average duration of marriage in relation to the ages of husband and wife are examples taken at random from a large field of research that was to be taken into cultivation within the subsequent hundred years on the lines chalked out by Graunt's book.
Nor is his merit adequately characterized by calling him the 'Columbus of the mortality bills.' It is perhaps still more to his credit that he displayed a sense of the methodological nature of those mass phenomena that may be described by 'laws' although the individual elements of them are fortuitous.
It must suffice to mention the main stepping stones of further progress.
The first to inquire with exactness into the problem of chances of survival was E. Halley (An Estimate of the Degrees of the Mortality of Mankind, 1693) J. P. Süssmilch (Die gottliche Ordnung in den Verändemngen des menschlichen Geschlechts..., 1740) may be said to have put vital statistics definitely on its feet by developing and systematizing the work of his English predecessors.
The theory of probability, the basis of statistical method, was developed by Jacques Bernoulli (1654-1705; Ars conjectandi, 1713) and still further by his nephews Nicholas (1687-l759) and Daniel Bernoulli (1700-1782), who also worked out further applications.
In view of the close alliance between modern economics and not only the material but also the methods of statistics, it is highly regrettable that we cannot follow this line of advance any further.

The reader may, however, glean most of what is wanting here from a study of H. L Westergaard's excellent Contributions to the History of Statistics (1932).

More important for economics proper was another performance that illustrates the curious obtuseness (just lamented) of economists: Gregory King's (1648-1712) law of demand for wheat. [4] 
It refers to deviations from an assumed normal and states that if the harvest falls short of this normal by 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5-tenths, the price will rise above what we should call its trend value- which King, however, assumed to be constant, at least, for many years together- by 3, 8, 16, 28, or 45-tenths.
From this an equation, explicitly giving the law of demand implied, can easily be derived.5 The remarkable thing is that King, though he did not attempt any further refinements, evidently understood the problem perfectly; that he worked with deviations from a normal is a particularly interesting touch.
Still more remarkable is it that, in spite of the general notoriety that 'King's law' was to gain, it did not occur to economists either to improve upon it -though all that was required was to proceed further on a line unmistakably chalked out- or to apply the same method to other commodities until the work of H. L. Moore, 1914 (see below, Part IV, chs. 5 and 7) released the avalanche of statistical demand curves of our own time- a lag of over 200 years.
Do not let us forget, however, the econometric work done elsewhere, for example, in Italy, by such nen as Verri or Carli.

To return to Petty.
All or most of his writings were prompted by the practical problems of his time and country -problems of taxation, of money, of the policy of international trade particularly with a view to getting the better of the Dutch, and so on.
The superior quality of his mind shows in all his comments and suggestions, but there is nothing very striking or very original or very distinctive about them: they represented the views that were then current, or rapidly becoming current, among the best English economists.
Nor is there anything distinctive in the fact itself that Petty no doubt reasoned from a more or less clearly perceived set of principles or theoretical schema; several of his contemporaries did that, and his schema was no more articulate than were theirs.
There was something, however, that was specifically his own and in which his mental energy and theoretical talent asserted themselves conspicuously: as already observed, he hammered out concepts from, and in connection with, statistical investigations, and in doing so he got further at some points than did any of his contemporaries.
His concept of velocity of money is -rightly- the most famous example and will be mentioned again in Chapter 6.
Another example is his work on national income: he did not bother about its definition, but he recognized its analytic importance and he tried to figure it out.

Modern income analysis may be said, in this sense, to start with him, though it seems on the whole better to trace it to Quesnay (see below, sec. 3).
A third example is this: everyone knows the phrase that has been repeated ad nauseam, 'labor is the father... of wealth, as lands are the mother.' This means that he put on their feet the two 'original factors of production' of later theorists.

Illogically dropping the mother, he declared elsewhere that capital (the 'wealth, stock, or provision of the nation') is the product of past labor -which brings to mind James Mill's blundering reformulation of Ricardo. [6] 
But it cannot be repeated too often that in thcmselves, and without the developments that make them valuable, such suggestions amount to very little.

What does amount to something is his research on a 'natural par' between land and labor, that is to stay, his attempt, foreshadowing the much more thorough-going one of Cantillon, to relate the values of land and labor by equating a piece of land that will produce a 'day's food of an adult man' (with certain corrections) to the day's labor of such a man.
If technological and all other conditions of production and consumption remained severely the same, this procedure might give us the economic philosopher's stone -the unit of measurement by which to reduce the available quantities of the two 'original factors,' land and labor, to a homogeneous quantity of 'productive power' that could be expressed by one figure, and the unit of which might serve as a land-labor standard of value.
As it is, this interesting venture, like all similar ones, proved to be a blind alley.

[1] &lsqb;J. A. S. had originally entitled this chapter 'The Econometricians'; on the type-script he added 'and Turgot?' in pencil.&rsqb;

[2] The word Econometrics is, I think, Professor Erisch's, and it has been coined by analogy with Biometrics, statistical biology.
A distinctive name, embodying a program, is perfectly justified in this case (see the first number of Econometrica, January 1933, on the foundation and aims of the Econometric Society).
And so we may leave it at that, though the term is exposed to objection on philological grounds: it ought to be either Ecometrics or Economometrics.

[1] Since statistics came to mean sometimes various bodies of facts, and sometimes various types of methods, there is nothing surprising in the number of different definitions that have been proposed by different workers from their different standpoints.
The German statistician Engel, whom we shall meet again on a more important occasion, once put that number as high as 180.
See G. Loyo, Evolución de la definición de estadística, Publicación 44 of the Instituto Panamérico de Geografía e Historia (1939).

[2] Petty (1623-87) was a self-made man -physician, surgeon, mathematician, theoretical engineer, member of parliament, public servant, and businessman one of those vital people who make a success of almost everything they touch, even of their failures.
Though he paid the price of his versatility, his is one of the great names in the history of economics.
But as regards his posthumous fame, luck lent its aid to merit.
Marx's decree to the effect that Petty was the founder of economics added socialist applause to bourgeois eulogies initiated by Roscher in 1857.
Thus, economists whom no other topic could unite, among them many who were complete strangers to the real meaning of Petty's message, have ever since joined forces in extolling him, Germans even more than Englishmen.
Perusal of Lord E. Fitzmaurice's Life (1895) is recommended.
Of Petty's writings the following are of prime importance for us: A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions (1662); Verbum Sapienti (written 1665, publ. 1691); Political Anatomy of Ireland (1672)- Political Arithmetick (written 1676, publ. 1690); Quantulum cunque concerning Money (written 1682); Essays on Political Arithmetick (written 1676-87), all republished in The Economic Writings of Sir William Petty, by C. H. Hull (1899).

This edition also contains the celebrated Natural and Political Observations... upon the Bills of Mortality, originally published (1662) by John Graunt.
A long and inconclusive controversy has been waged on the question of Petty's share in this performance, which may be looked upon as the fountainhead of modern demography, though Graunt should not, on this account, be called the 'founder' of statistics.
Lord E. Fitzmaurice's Life has been supplemented by the Marquis of Lansdowne's editions of the Petty Papers (1927) and of the Petty- Southwell Correspondence, 1676-87 (1928).

[4] The name of Charles Davenant (1656-1714) moves slowly into the front-rank position that belongs to him but it has not quite arrived there as yet.
He was a public servant but also a politician, thrice elected M.P., and, as such, a violent enemy of the Whigs rather than a violent Tory: perhaps it is this and the effects of this on someof his writings that interfered with his recognition.
There also was something else.

Those historians who ask 'What does a man stand for?' did not quite know what to make of him.
On the one hand, the 'liberals' among them were delighted when they hit upon such phrases as that trade is by nature free, that it finds its own channels that laws which limit or regulate it are seldom advantageous to the public (though they may serve individual interests), and that money was a mere counter.
On the other hand, they were grieved to find in him so much about regulative policy that they had to class him as an adherent of a (nonexisting) 'mercantilist theory.' Some accounted for what they took to be a self-contradictory attitude by the hypothesis that in those earlier writings in which the 'liberal' passages occur, Davenant spoke his mind freely whereas later on, in office especially, he turned opportunist.
We shall see later (below, ch. 7) ,that there is another explanation, viz., that he was a good economist.
His Works have (incompletely) edited by Sir Charles Whitworth (1771).
Additional ones have since emerged, the latest find being published under the title Two Manuscripts by I Charles Davenunt, 1942 (A Reprint of Economic Tracts, ed. by Professor G. Heberton Evans, Jr., with an instructive introduction by Professor Usher).
Also see Y. Ballière, L'Oeuvre économique de Charles Davenant (1913).
His contributions to economic analysis amount to an impressive total and may be classified as follows: (1) there is, implicit but clear, behind all his writings the awareness of the logic of the relations by which things economic hang together, a merit that is somewhat, but not necessarily much reduced by the priority of Child, Barbon, and also others; (2) he substantially improved, though only by what may be called a case method, his epoch's acquirements in the theories of money and of international trade and finance, (3) he was one of the first authorities of his time on public finance -taxes, debts, and so on; (4) he was one of the few who understood, and co-operated in, the work of Political Arithmetick.
Individual points will be noticed in subsequent chapters.

[4] Natural and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the State and Condition of England in 1696 (sec.
Vll).
This work, a pioneer of quantitative economics and one of the best examples of what Political Arithmetick stood for, was not published by the author.
Davenant incorporated some parts of it in his Essay upon the Probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Ballance of Trade (1699), but the whole was not presented to the public before 1804, when George Chalmers published it with a life of the author.
The first five sections deal with the number of inhabitants, ingeniously iníerred from hearth-tax returns, age distribution, marital status, mortality in cities and the country, and cognate matters.
Sections VIII-XIII are devoted to matters of public finance.
From our standpoint, sections VI and VII are the most important.
Besides the famous demand schedule, they contain other noteworthy contributions, such as his estimates of the income and expenditure of the nation in 1688, of meat consumption, and of the quantity of gold and silver in England and other countries.

[6] It has been calculated by G. U. Yule ('Crop Production and Prices: A Note on Gregory King's Law,' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 1915, p. 296 et seq.).

CHAPTER 2 

Socio-Political Backgrounds 

DURING THE LAST decade or so before the French Revolution, some of the traits became visible of a social and political pattern that, after the revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars and their immediate consequences were over, more or less established itself for the rest of the nineteenth century.
It seems desirable to touch upon a few of its essential features, if only to correct some misapprehensions the reader's mind may harbor and to soften the unrealistically definite colors in which the various ideological traditions have painted it.

In doing so we shall have to struggle with a difficulty that is not new to us.
We are going to try to visualize an economic and social structure -in process of interessant change, of course- and the cultural superstructure that was either associated with it or, according to Marxist doctrine, generated by it: we call it the civilization or the spirit of the times, or the Zeitgeist. [1] 
But this Zeitgeist is never a structural unit.

It is always an imperfect synthesis of warring elements and can never be described truthfully in terms of a few consistent 'principles'.
The most obvious reason for this is that at any given time both the economic and social structure of a society and its Zeitgeist contain elements that hail from historically prior states.

But there are other and more fundamental reasons, less easy to explain, which make it impossible to analyze what happens in a social organism in terms of processes that conform to the immanent logic of its state and in terms of processes that are induced by the resistance of survivals or, still more superficially, as 'progress' and 'reaction.' The conceptual arrangement we are going to use bears witness to this difficulty.

On the whole, however, it may be averred that, though the peak of bourgeois ascendancy occurred in the subsequent period, it was in the period under survey that the ascent of the business class was most nearly unimpeded, most nearly unchallenged.
In the great nations, the bourgeoisie did not rule politically, the most important exceptions being the United States and, for the seventeen years of Louis Philippe's regime, France.
But in all countries the governments, however unbourgeois in origin and structure, not excluding those that have been voted most 'reactionary' by bourgeois oppositions, backed the economic interests of the business class almost without question and did their best to protect them. [2] 
Still more important, they did so in a spirit of laissezfaire, that is to say, on the theory that the best way of promoting economic development and general welfare is to remove fetters from the private-enterprise economy and to leave it alone.

This is what will be meant in this book by Economic Liberalism.
The reader is requested to keep this definition in mind because the term has acquired a different -in fact almost the opposite- meaning since about 1900 and especially since about 1930: as a supreme, if unintended, compliment, the enemies of the system of private enterprise have thought it wise to appropriate its label.

By Political Liberalism, which must be distinguished from economic liberalism as our footnote amply shows, we mean sponsorship of parliamentary government, freedom to vote and extension of the right to vote, freedom of the press, divorce of secular from spiritual government, trial by jury, and so on, including retrenchment and pacific, though not necessarily pacifist, foreign policy.
This was the program [3] of the first phase of the French Revolution.
A tendency to carry it out eventually asserted itself everywhere.
But the rates of speed differed widely as between different countries and so did the combinations of forces and circumstances that were responsible for each step.

The rate at which the business class itself was converted to political liberalism also differed widely, and not only as between different countries, but also as between different subgroups of the bourgeoisie.
Not even economic liberalism was welcomed everywhere and by the whole business class; political liberalism came to large sectors of it like an undesired child.
The adherents of the Spanish Constitution of 1811, who were the first to call themselves liberales, had not the whole bourgeoisie behind them.
Neither had the French libéraux of the 1820's.
It was a wing only, which was but semirecognized and received also nonbusiness support from intellectuals and the masses, that forced the program of political liberalism upon a not-quite-willing majority, though this majority was converted in the end.
In England, this shows quite clearly in the way in which first the Whigs and then the Palmerstonians were pushed along hy a small group that was known as 'radical.' This group, or at least its intellectual core, the Philosophical Radicals, is of particular interest to us because some of the most important English economists belonged to it or sympathized with it.

But unlike their successors of a later day, these radicals were not at all what we should call radical in matters of economic policy.

Some of them J. S. Mill in particular, visualized indeed a different organization of economic activity for a more or less distant future.

For the time being, however, they were economic liberals in the sense defined above, or what we should now call conservatives.
Their radicalism found plenty to do in the purely political sphere.

Moreover, at the beginning of the period, laissez-faire -and in particular free trade- was not as yet established policy.
It was something to be fought for, fresh not stale, and something that was felt to be 'progressive.' It attracted the majority of intellectuals instead of disgusting them.
Their idea of reform was to clear the economic system of what they regarded as nonessential 'abuses' in order to allow laissez-faire to work itself out fully. [4] 
They were supporters of the new Poor Law and no friends to Chartism, still less to any of the socialist groups that were in existence then. [5] 

Thus the correlation between the interests and attitudes of the business class and liberalism was anything but perfect.
In addition, as we have already observed, it was by no means only its own left wing that pushed the bourgeoisie along.
Conservative governments -and not only the autocratic ones, but also the English conservative governments- had a decisive share in the progress toward economic liberalism.
Moreover, groups, strata, parties, and attitudes of noncapitalist origin, though they had to yield occasionally, held their own on the whole.
The period's political history bears witness to this.
So does its religious history.
The period indeed begins and ends with a decade in which indifference or even actively hostile laicism prevailed.
But between the Napoleonic Wars and the 1860's, the Catholic Church experienced a marked revival of activity and power that was paralleled in Protestant countries, especially in England (evangelical movement on the one hand, Oxford movement on the other).
Nor do the period's currents of thought outside the religious sphere fit into any simple schema.
Tory democracy put in an appearance.
Naïve radicalism -and the philosophical radicals were nothing but not naïve- certainly did interpret all these things as survivals.
Only the subsequent period was to show that, when they thought they fought the past, they were really fighting the future.

A bird's-eye view of the intellectual scenery of the period and of some developments in fields of particular interest to the economist will be presented in the next chapter.
The rest of this one will be devoted to a survey of the policies of the period.
For brevity's sake, we shall confine ourselves almost entirely to economic policies and to the English paradigm.

1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

The liberal intermezzo was everywhere, but most spectacularly in England, associated with an economic development which, so far as we can judge, was unprecedented -all the achievements of the early and middle railroad age.
It was easy to attribute that impressive sequence of undeniable successes to the policy of economic liberalism as its main or even only cause.
The reader will understand that, however inadequate, this theory was far from being wholly wrong.
It cannot reasonably be doubted that, in the historical conditions of that epoch, the removal of fetters from the energies that crowded into business pursuits, together with a policy that guaranteed to the businessman secure enjoyment of success and at the same time made it clear to him that he had no help to expect in case of failure, must in fact have had the energizing influence that was extolled until the argument got stale through repetition.
Thus the system kept on justifying itself in the eyes of most contemporaneous observers, even of those who, like J. S. Mill, bore it no love.
Such complacent registration of 'progress' seems strange to us who look back upon that age from different standpoints and in a different humor and abhor the atmosphere of the hard-driven homes of rising industrialists almost as much as the squalid dwellings of their workmen.
But let us remember that much of all that offends us now was in the nature of childhood diseases -some of which were passing even at the time of Marx's glowing indictments- and that the economic promise, which the system of free enterprise held out to all, was not an empty one- the standard of living of the masses remained low, but it rose steadily almost all the time; ever-growing numbers were absorbed at increasing real wages- the 'free breakfast table' of the English free traders was perhaps the least misleading slogan that politicians ever forged.
Also, contemporaneous and later critics, both conservative and socialist, have never adequately realized the extent to which the welfare policies of the next period were rendered possible by the developments of the first three quarters of the nineteenth century and by the policies that fostered them.
So far as this goes, there is no reason for discounting either the honesty or the competence of the economists of that time' or for voting them victims of ideological delusion.

2 FREE TRADE AND FOREIGN RELATIONS 

The English advocates of free trade claimed perfect generality for their argument.
For them, it was absolute and eternal wisdom for all times and places; be who refused to accept it was a fool or a crook or both.
But as has been pointed out many times, England's individual historical situation in which a free-trade policy was clearly indicated had probably more to do with her conversion than had the element of general truth in the free-trade argument.
The hope that a spectacular example would convert other nations also may have played some role.
The decisive factors and arguments, however, were quite independent of any such hope.
The superiority of England's industry in 1840 was unchallengeable for the calculable future.
And this superiority had everything to gain from cheaper raw materials and foodstuffs.
These were no delusions: so satisfied was the nation with what it took to be the results of this policy that criticism was almost silenced until the depression of the eighties.
Even that hope did not prove illusory for several decades.
Though England remained the only great nation to embrace free trade wholeheartedly, all the other nations displayed tendencies toward free trade for longer or shorter periods and to a greater or lesser degree.
Thus Prussia and then the German Empire, from the Prussian Tariff of 1818 to the Caprivi treaties of 1891-47 moved on a line that never departed very far from free-trade principles. [1] 
The Anglo-French treaty of 1860 (Cobden-Chevalier Trcaty) marked an important if short-lived ulterruption in the generally protectionist policy of France.
It should be observed, however, that on the Continent free-trade or quasi-free-trade policy was never supported by public opinion as strongly as was the case in England: it was imposed by bureaucracies -as in Germany- or by rulers -such as Napoleon III- who were doctrinaire liberals in these matters.
Those economists who, like the majority of the French, were free traders elicited little response from the public.
In the United States, too, free trade was never popular except with economists and not with all of them.

Different national conditions of course amply account for this, and they also enable us to put a more favorable construction on the views of protectionist economists in these countries than ardent free traders were wont to put upon them.
The dramatic story of England's conversion to free trade need not be retold here.
But there are two aspects of it that we cannot afford to neglect.

First, from a parliamentary point of view the adoption of the free-trade policy stands wholly to the credit of the conservative party.
The first effective steps in the direction of free trade were taken before the outbreak of the French Revolution by Lord Shelburne and the younger Pitt.
Advance toward it was resumed in the 1820'5 by Huskisson.
And free trade was (substantially) carried' the most difficult point-removal of the import duties on grains-included, by the conservative government of Sir Robert Peel.
Though his cabinet and party foundered on the rocks, it still remains true that a government largely composed of landowners carried a policy that was obviously contrary to their own economic class interests as well as to the economic interests of the class with which they were most closely allied, the farmers.
Interpret it as you please, but do not forget to ponder over this most interesting phenomenon of political sociology.
The manufacturers and merchants who provided political steam are another matter.
The Merchants' Petition of 1820 must be mentioned because it was drawn up by one of the leading scientific economists of the age, Thomas Tooke.
And this is our only opportunity, in a history of analysis to mention the two heroes of the Anti-Corn-Law League, Richard Cobden and John Bright.

[1] The Marxist term Überbau is satisfactorily rendered by its literal translation, super-structure.
But for the German word Zeitgeist there is no perfect equivalent.
Hence I am going to use it (as I do other foreign terms that are hard to translate exactly) just as American physcists use Eigenschwingung and American philosophers, Weltansheuung.

[2] The Prussian govemment of the Stein-Hardenberg era, the Austro-Hungarian government from 1849 to 1859, and the Russian government throughout, are the most striking examples of governments that, though surely autocratic enough, adhered, so far as the principles and tendencies of their economic policy is concerned, to what I am about to call economic liberalism.
This may read surprisingly.
But the reason why it does so is only that these countries were, at the beginning of the period, so far removed from a state of individual freedom in the economic sphere, and that, intheir conditions (especially in the conditions of Russia), progress toward this state had to be so slow that the tendency does not show so spectacularly as it does in England, Perusal of any economic history of Europe and, to some extent, the comments that are to follow in the text will, however, convince the reader.
In order to understand the economic literature of the period, this fact is of prime importance.
Both Prussian and Russian Smithianism was not just a literary fad indulged in by oppositions: its stronghold was in the conservative bureaucracies.

[3] Certain items of it are disputable.
For example, men whose right to be called political liberals cannot be denied opposed free public education.
Not all liberals sponsored extension of the franchise; some conservatives did.

[4] It is, therefore, understandable that Marx and the Marxists should have professed contempt for bourgeois radicalism -though they transferred their contempt also to the radicalism of a later time- that they should have looked upon it as a sham that was really meant to preserve what it pretended to reconstruct.
But understandable thought such an opinion is in people who felt themlselves to be the competitors of bourgeois radicalism, it is nevertheless guite wrong (1) because radicals and, drawn along by them, simple liberals helped labor to gather in a harvest of considerable value even in the economic field; and (2) because their work in the political field created the conditions under which socialist parties were able to grow to numerical importance.

[5] On the Chartist Movement, see the book with this title by M. Hovell (1918).

[1] The fact is somewhat obscured by the moves and countermoves that preceded the conclusion of the Customs Union (Zollverein) of 1834 and by concessions made from time to time to Individual protectionist interests.
On the whole, however, the policy of the Customs Union and, for the rest of the century, of the Empire is adequately described by the sentence above.
Bismarck's mild protectionism had mainly fiscal reasons.

CHAPTER 4 

Review of the Troops 

ACCORDING TO PLAN, we shall survey the general layout of this period's analytic economics in Chapter 5, taking up headquarters in J. S. Mill's Principles.
The review of the more important men and groups in the present chapter is for the benefit of readers who are unfamiliar with any but the greatest figures.
It will not contain more names than are necessary for a general orientation.
Others will be introduced as we proceed.

1 THE MEN WHO WROTE ABOVE THEIR TIME 

We have emphasized the relative maturity that economies gained during the period under survey.
Its relative immaturity might be measured by the number of important performances, the powerful originality of which was recognized later but which the profession completely, or almost completely, failed to recognize at the time.
This happened in the cases of Cournot and of the various writers, especially Dupuit, Gossen, and Lloyd, who discovered the marginal utility principle.
We shall transfer them to Part IV, merely observing for the moment the melancholy implications of this neglect: it shows a lack of alertness and of purely scientific interest among the economists of the period that goes far toward explaining why economies did not advance more quickly. [1] 

In addition, there were other performances that fared a little better but also proved to be above their time in the sense that they failed to receive the attention and exert the influence which, enlightened by hindsight, we should deem appropriate.
Of these, the most noteworthy are the writings that developed the marginal productivity principle.
Since some leaders of the day occasionally did move within its orbit, [2] we shall at once make our bow to two early exponents of that principle who are particularly important, Longfield and Thunen.
And I shall append a notice of still another man who wrote above his time, John Rae.

Mountifort Longfield (1802-84) was a lawyer by training and the first incumbent of the chair of political economy -a foundation of Archbishop Whately's- at Trinity College, Dublin.
He also wrote on the Poor Law and other subjects, but the only publication of his we need notice is Lectures on Political Economy (delivered 1833, publ. 1834, London School Reprint 1931).
Anyone who cares to glance at this book will readily understand why, in spite of its merits of exposition and matter, he failed to make a mark, so that he had to be unearthed, along with others, by Professor Seligman in the justly famous article 'On Some Neglected British Economists,' Economic Journal, 1903, for which all students of the history of economics have every reason to feel lasting gratitude.

But this neglect is readily understandable only if we realize what it is that will impress professional opinion and what it is historians of economics usually look for, namely, on the one hand, a man's views on the practical issues of his day and, on the other hand, the way in which he handles the theoretical tools that are common currency in his day.

New ideas, unless carefully elaborated, painstakingly defended, and 'pushed' simply will not tell.
Longfield's case illustrates so well the important question 'what takes effect and how and why,' because Longfield did not fail to keep contact with Ricardian teaching -he gave Ricardians every opportunity to be led to a more perfect analysis gently and without any violent break- and because he did find successors: he really founded a local 'school' (on this, see R. D. Black, 'Trinity College, Dublin, and the Theory of Value, 1832-1863,' Economica, 1945).
His successor in the Whately chair, Isaac Butt (Rent, Profits, and Labour, 1838), was his professed disciple and -correctly as I believe, if we consider pure theory only- put him on the same level as A. Smith.

Longfield's merits may be summed up by saying that he overhauled the whole of economic theory and produced a system that would have stood up well in 1890.
Among other things, his argument against the labor theory of value is one of the best ever penned.
However, we must confine ourselves to his two original contributions.
He was one of those who anticipated the essentials of Bohm-Bawcrk's theory (by making the 'roundabout' process of production the pivot of his analysis of capital).
And he presented a reasonably complete and reasonably correct theory of distribution based upon the marginal productivity principle, not only the marginal cost principle.
That is to say, he explained both 'profits' (return upon physical capital) and wages in terms of the contributions to total product that result from the addition to the productive set-up of the last element of capital (tools) or labor.

Thus at least it seems fair to interpret him, though in details his argument is open to many criticisms (among other things he failed, as did many writers even after 1900, to distinguish clearly between the last laborer added and the least efficient laborer).
The argument is still worth reading because it shows nicely the operations by which economists' minds paved their way toward the use of the general marginal principle.
But we cannot stay to work this out.

Johann Heinrich von Thunen (1783-1850), the man whom A. Marshall professed to have 'loved above all my other masters' (Memorials of Alfred Marshall, 1925, p. 360), meant, of course, much less to his age than did Ricardo.
But this is due to the latter's brilliant advocacy of policies.
If we judge both men exclusively by the amount of ability of the purely theoretical kind that went into their work, then, I think Thünen should be placed above Ricardo or indeed above any economist of the period, with the possible exception of Cournot.
He was a North German Junker and followed the typical profession of the North German Junkertum (the correct translation is 'gentry'): for most of his life (after having completed his education at an agricultural college supplemented by two semesters at the University of Gttingen), he farmed the indifferent soil of his medium-sized estate, just about managing to make both ends meet and, sacrificing everything else, to keep up his intellectual interests in wintertime.
This practical farmer was a born thinker, however, and quite unable to supervise the teams that ploughed his land without working out the pure theory of the process.
His thoughts roamed toward wide generalizations from an early age but, first of all, he was an agriculturist, schooled in the ideas of Thaer, and an agricultural economist.
As such he did enjoy recognition in his own country.
Later on, he was also recognized more generally but in a peculiar way.
Roscher, for example, considered Thunen's work to be one of the most important that had been written in Germany in the field of exact economics.
Yet he entirely failed to grasp its true meaning.
Reviewers were complimentary.
Yet none of them understood the work except the part of it that is listed below under (III).
For the rest Thünen, unlike Cournot, never came into his own.
For though he continued to be quoted, the marginal productivity theory of distribution was independently rediscovered later, and his message was fully understood only at a time when all that would strike the reader was its shortcomings.
The first volume of his Der isolierte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirthschaft und Nutionalokonomie was published in 1826 (2nd ed., 1842); the first part of the second volume, in 1850.

The rest of the second volume and a third were published, from unfinished but well-advanced manuscripts, by H. Schumacher in 1863.

There is a new edition with an introduction by Heinrich Waentig in Sammlung sozialwissenschaftlicher Meister (vol.
XIII 1910).
The third volume contains 'Principles for the Determination of the Rent of Land, the Optimal Period of Rotation, and the Value of Timber of Different Ages for Firs' &lsqb;This is a literal translation by J. A. S.&rsqb;.
The standard biography is also by Schumacher (1868) but the reader finds the relevant data in Professor E. Schneider's article 'Johann Heinrich von Thünen' in Econometrica, January 1934.

Thünen's contributions may be summed up as follows. (I) He was the first to use the calculus as a form of economic reasoning. (II) He derived his generalizations, or some of them, from numerical data, spending ten laborious years (1810-20) in carrying out in detail a comprehensive scheme of accounting for his farm in order to let the facts themselves suggest the answers to his questions.
This unique piece of work, undertaken in the spirit of the theorist, makes him one of the patron saints of econometrics.
Nobody, before or after, ever understood so profoundly the true relation between 'theory' and 'facts.' (III) Nevertheless, this man who was so fact-minded knew at the same time how to frame ingenious and fertile hypothetical schemata.
His peak achievement in this art is his conception of an isolated domain of circular form and uniform fertility, free from all obstacles to or special facilities for transport, with a 'town' (the only source of demand for agricultural products) in the center.
Given techniques, cost of transportation, and relative prices of products and factors, he deduced from this the optimal locations (which under those assumptions would be ring-shaped zones) for the various kinds of agrarian activities -dairying, forestry, and hunting included.
A theory of rent, in some points superior to that of Ricardo, results as a by-product.
Though many people objected to such bold abstraction, this was the part of his work that was understood and recognized in his time.
For us, it is important to realize its brilliant originality.
Ricardo or Marx (or whoever it is among the theorists of that period who holds the place of honor in the reader's scale) worked on problems that presented themselves from; outside by means of analytic tools that had been forged before.
Thünen alone worked from the unformed clay of facts and visions.
He did not re-build.
He built- and the economic literature of his and earlier times might just as well not have existed at all so far as his work is concerned. (IV) In quite the same spirit, he was the second (the first was Cournot, by date of publication at least) to visualize the general interdependence of all economic quantities and the necessity of representing this cosmos by a system of equations. (v) He introduced explicitly the tool of analysis, actually used of course by Ricardo, that may be termed the 'steady state' of the economic processðMarshall's long-run normalðthat was akin to statics rather than to the stationary state of 'classical' theory. (VI) As fully as Longfield, and somewhat more correctly, he developed a marginal productivity theory of distribution, at least for the relation between capital and labor, interest and wages.
But the fundamental idea itself (which he correctly puts, in words, in terms of partial differential coefficients, Waentig edition, p. 584) is almost a secondary element in the wealth of problems he grouped around it.
No idea of these can be conveyed.
Instead we must touch on another point, not because it is worth our while in itself, but because it has attracted attention beyond its deserts: Thünen's famous formula for the 'natural wage ' He must have thought a lot of it, because he had it engraved upon his tombstone.

For simplicity, consider a one-year productive process, the only expense of production being wages.
Call the dollar value of the national net product xxx , the total pay roll xxx , so that total profits (which Thünen, like others, identified with interest) are xxx , and the rate of profits (interest) is xxx .
Suppose that the wage receivers spend a fixed amount, xxx , per year, investing the rest, xxx , at the current rate of interest, xxx .
If this investment, they will evidently earn xxx .
If this expression is to be a maximum, we must have [4] ( xxx and xxx being treated as constants), xxx from which follows Thunen's formula, xxx .
This wage would maximize workers' income from investment.
The idea is not without interesting suggestions and might be used among other things in certain schemes of profit sharing.
But, of course, this wage is not 'natural' in the sense that the free-market mechanism tends to produce it.
The formula does not embody Thünen's theory of wages.
Nor is it an essential part of it.
The wildly unrealistic assumptions should not, however, prompt us to declare the argument wrong.
Under its assumptions it is quite right.

John Rae (1796-1872; not to be confused with the other John Rae mentioned in this book, the biographer of A. Smith), a Scotsman whose intellectual refinement -he had emerged from the Universities of Aberdeen and Edinburgh as a good classical scholar and mathematician and as a biologist and physician who was at least half trainedðand nervous sensibility made him a failure at everything he touched.
From 1821 on, he roamed about in Canada, the United States, and other countries, the Hawaiian Islands included, where he had to rough it (two spells of schoolmastership being by far the most congenial of all the employments he tried) until, shortly before his death, he drifted with broken masts into the haven of a friendly house in Clifton, Staten Island.
Yet, all the time, he also struggled with what under the circumstances was the greatest misfortune of all, an unmanageable wealth of ideas on the subjects of biology, philology, ethnology, aeronautics, and what-notðall, or most of them, parts of a grandiose plan, conceived in his youth, of a 'philosophical history' of humanity.
Up to this point the reader will feel that he is recognizing a well-known type.

He is wrong.
For one achievement, complete and workmanlike, yet of striking power, refutes the idea the reader may have conceived.
This achievement happened to be in our field.
In vision and originality, Rae far surpassed the economists who were successful.

[1] We may adduce mitigating circumstances, but substantially the indictment stands.
Cournot was not unfavorably placed for getting a hearing.
If he failed to get it, this was wholly due to the mathematics in the book.
But preciselyðwhat sort of a profession was this that laid aside a work because it was a little difficult of access? Dupuit incited at least some criticism.
Gossen was unfavorably placed and, if he did nothing lo circulate his book among professors, the latter's sin may have been venial.
But W. F. Lloyd was 'Student of Christ Church and Professor of Political Economy' at Oxford.
His argument on marginal utility was quite straightforward and there was nothing deterrent about it.
Several writers brushed against it, e.g.
Senior.
It must have become known to a number of people.
The only construction that it is possible to put upon the fact that Lloyd's argument exerted no influence is that the economists who read it were blind to the analytic possibilities enshrined in it. 

[2] Later on, it will become clear to the reader that it would have been quite impossible for them not to do so.
Also, it will beexplained later why I do not think that they, Ricardo especially, should be credited with more than is implied by the phrase in the text. 

[4] In order to have a maximum and not a minimum, it is further necessary that the derivative be negative.
But this is all right, since it equals xxx being essentially positive. 

CHAPTER 2 

Background and Patterns 

THE NEARER AN epoch is to us, the less we understand it: our own we understand least of all.
For this reason alone, the sketch of the cultural pattern of the period to be surveyed must be drawn with greater care than was required in the case of the preceding period.

Moreover, the cultural pattern actually grew everywhere more complex as the bourgeois era wore on.
The reader will please recall what has been said in Part III (ch. 3) on the subject of the lack of uniformity in the cultural pattern or Zeitgeist of any epoch: to speak of a single dominant Zeitgeist at all spells distortion of the facts -in most cases ideological distortion.
But this fundamental truth of cultural sociology applies to the period under discussion with a vengeance.
However severely we must simplify things, the following comments will make this abundantly clear.

1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

The period we are about to survey was again one of rapid economic development.
It was then that Germany and the United States acquired the status of front-rank industrial powers.
But elsewhere, for instance in Austria, Italy, Japan, and Russia, industrialization proceeded at a rate (though not of course in terms of absolute figures) that was not less remarkable.
After 1900, England failed to keep in step, but up to about that year she experienced an increase in wealth that may be characterized by the fact that, from 1880 to 1900, English real wages per earner increased by nearly 50 per cent. [1] 
This created an entirely new standard of life for the masses.

But until almost the end of the century expansion in physical output was accompanied by falling prices, widespread unemployment of labor, and business losses.
The spells of 'prosperity' were shorter and weaker than were the 'depressions.' In fact, the whole span between 1873 and 1898 has been dubbed the Great Depression.2 This particular edition of the 'paradox of poverty in plenty' is not difficult to explain.
All the observable phenomena can be satisfactorily accounted for by the impact of the products pouring forth from a productive apparatus that the two previous decades had greatly expanded.
In a socialist society' such periods might be hailed as periods of harvest.
In capitalist society, they do not cease to be that.
But this aspect is entirely lost in the fears, sufferings, and resentments generated by the dislocation of existing industrial structures that is the first consequence of technological or commercial progress.
An example will illustrate this.
In the seventies and eighties, improved land and sea transportation brought greatly increased quantities of cheap American wheat to Europe' which meant severe depression to European agriculture.
Of course' this was an essential element in the 50 per cent increase in the real wages of English labor that we have noticed above.
But European farmers and their spokesmen did not look at it in this light.
And if they had, they would have derived very little comfort from it.

Agrarian sectors were everywhere important enough to spread their depression to others.
But, though this would take more space to show, the industrial sectors had analogous troubles of their own.
In a sense, these were surface troubles incident to a process of adaptation that led from one long-run spell of prosperity to another.
But for many individuals and groups the only available method of adaptation was bankruptcy.
For labor it meant unemployment or the ever present threat of it.

The reader will find it easy to visualize the practical problems that resulted from this and the reactions to them of groups, classes, parties, and governments.
It is on this background that we shall have to paint for the rest of this chapter.
So obvious is this that there is less danger of forgetting it than there is of exaggerating the extent to which the facts alluded toðboth the 'progress' and its vicissitudesðdetermincd political and cultural history.
For instance, those facts do explain much of the radicalization of the masses we observe: the rising standard of life and a novel sense of power contributed to that result not less than did the threat of unemployment.
They also explain much of the general zest for social reform, of the tendencies toward industrial organization (especially of the cartel type), of the increasing government activities, of the dissatisfaction with the results produced by free trade, even of renascent militarism.
But the further fact that none of these tendencies showed any signs of weakening during the fifteen years before the war, years that were of quite different economic complexion -most of them in fact gathered further momentum- should warn us not to trust such explanations too much.
There are deeper things... &lsqb;J.
A. S. intended to expand this section.&rsqb;

2 THE DEFEAT OF LIBERALISM 

On the whole, the business class still had its way throughout the period, at least up to the beginning of this century, though much more so in the United States than in Europe.
But its serene confidence in the virtues of laissez-faire was gone and its good conscience was going.
Hostile forces were slowly gathering with which it had to compromise.
Still more significant, it grew increasingly willing to compromise and to adopt its enemies' views. [1] 
Economic liberalism [2] thus became riddled with qualifications that sometimes implied surrender of its principles.
Political liberalism, from the eighties on, lost its hold upon electorates much more rapidly than appears on the surface: only in a few countries, such as Germany and Austria, did genuinely liberal parties- in the sense in which this term is used in this book- meet with open defeat at the polls; in others, especially in England, the strength of existing political organizations and their leadership was so great as to make it possible for them to win victories on radicalized programs. [3] 
The reasons why, and the extent to which, all this was different in the United States need not, it is hoped, be explained.
What would have to be a lengthy analysis may be summed up by saying that, barring a number of groups and movements, none of which was strong enough to influence national politics perceptibly, all the average American's radicalism amounted t~and this also goes for economistsðwas hostility to Big Business ('curbing monopoly').

Before trying to see how all this mirrored itself in those departments of public po&rsqb;icy in which we are primarily interested (section 3) we must briefly glance at what we have described above as political forces hostile to bourgeois laissez-faire that were gathering momentum during that period.

Orthodox socialism is the most obvious one.
But it was not, during that period, the most important one.
In any case, its career may be assumed to be so familiar to the reader that very few comments will suffice for our purpose. [4] 
First, the period saw the rise of Marxist parties in almost all countries.
But even the most successful of these, the German Social Democratic Party, which by weight of talent and numbers was an important factor in politics, kept on principle aloof from political responsibility [5] and thus reduced its practical influence, even on matters of social legislation, far below what it might have been.

None of the other Marxist parties was numerically significant except the Austrian one.
The non-Marxist socialist parties, which shaded off into non-socialist labor groups and which felt no qualms about political co-operation with bourgeois parties, did get near or into political office here and there.
These events -which raised the much-debated issue of Millerandism [6] - and the appearance, in 1906, of a Labour party in the English Parliament are, of course, tremendously important.
But for the time being their importance was symptomatic only.
For those who had their ear to the ground another symptom was still more significantðand much more so than were the most flamboyant revolutionary speeches.
To be sure, there were many bourgeois who habitually exploded at the mere sound of the word Socialism.
But there were others who were in sympathy with socialist ideas and, to an extent much greater than is commonly realized, lent practical support to them in one way or another, though not always openly.
Of course, the non-socialist vote of the socialist parties was in many cases nothing but the manifestation of temporary resentments.
But the number was on the increase of those who approved of the ultimate ends of socialism or who approved of the immediate aims of socialist parties -or who did both and still professed that they were not socialists.

The growth of bourgeois radical groups and parties was immediately of greater practical importance.
They varied greatly in type and programðfrom liberal groups of the old type that had taken aboard more or less important items of social reform, to groups of intellectuals that descended from the philosophical radicals of old and differed little, if at all, from 'reformist' socialists such as Eduard Bernstein (ch. 5, sec. 8, below).
The reason why radicals of the more advanced type carried political weight out of all proportion to their voting power -or, like the English Fabians, [7] without having any voting power at all- was that their support was often needed by governments in precarious positions, both where radicals formed parties of their own and where they formed the left wing of a bigger party of different complexion.

This very situation characterizes the epoch.

Bourgeois radicalism might be considered as a mere by-product of the growth of socialism.
And the latter was without doubt the product of laissez-faire society: one need not be a Marxist in order to realize that the private enterprise system tends to develop toward a socialist form of organization.
The facts we have been discussing so far, however ominous they may have been for the bourgeois order of things, were therefore part and parcel of this very order and in this sense perfectly 'natural.' But there were others that did not fit into the schema or logic of capitalist evolution.
Some of these do not present any difficulties of analysis either, but some others do.

As regards the first category, we shall in fact have no difficulty in understanding that rapid capitalist evolution will evoke resistance from strata that are threatened by it and cannot adapt themselves to a new form of existence.
This was the case with the European peasantry -also with English and especially Irish farmers- and, on the continent of Europe, with the independent artisans.
Landlords were, of course, in the same boat.
Very naturally, they clamored for protective legislation - that was bound to violate the creed of economic liberalism- and lent support to groups and parties that were anti-capitalist though not socialist. [8] 
Even within the range of these phenomena, however, we cannot be sure that this was all.
Many of the spokesmen of these groups did not feel that they were concerned with a particularly difficult economic situation -they felt, unlike the bourgeois radicals, that the whole liberalistic schema, including its legal and moral aspects, was fundamentally wrong.

The second category consists of cases where the same attitude stands out better and presents much more of a problem because it does not link up so obviously with a definite economic plight.
In countries where the bureaucracy was a powerful factor and where, as in Germany, it had sponsored economic liberalism in the preceding period, a significant change occurred: without as yet becoming definitely hostile, the bureaucracy began to look upon the business class in a different way -to consider it as something to be controlled and managed rather than to be left alone, much as the American bureaucracy does today.
The white collar class that increased rapidly in numbers and the other groups that were beginning to be called the 'new middle class'- the 'old' consisting of farmers, artisans, and small traders- displayed a remarkably strong resistance to socialist propaganda.
But the minority that embraced economic or political liberalism in our sense was not much greater, if at all, than the minority that went socialist.
The rest evolved attitudes and reform programs of their own.
Finally, individuals and subgroups of all classes broke loose from economic and political liberalismðthough often retaining the label ðto do likewise.
And they had one thing in common in spite of all the differences in interests and cultural preconceptions that no doubt existed between them: the central or controlling position that they allocated to the State and the Nationðthe National State.

Accordingly, these tendencies are commonly referred to as 'nationalistic' or 'neo-mercantilist' or 'imperialist,' but though these and other phrases do express individual aspects of an attitude that is as difficult to define as it is to explain, they do not express the whole of it.
Marxists have simple formulae to offer that will fit these phenomena into their scheme -the simplest being perhaps that 'imperialism' is the last stage (or 'last card') of capitalism.
Popular social psychology has other simple formulae to offer.
I have none and must content myself with pointing out that we have been looking at the roots of modern totalitarianism.

[1] A.L. Rowley, Wages and Income in the U. K. since 1860 (1937), Table XIV, p. 94.
Of course, this means only that the total wage bill kept its percentage position in total national income. 2 For a historian's protest against this phrase, see H. L. Beales's article, 'The Great Depression in Industry and Trade,' Economic History Review, October 1934.
The author makes it last only to 1886.
But all the symptoms that this phrase is to indicate persisted for about another decade.

[1] This statement involves a distinction between enforced and voluntary retreat that a popular theory of political behavior refuses to accept.
According to this theory, no class ever retreats voluntarily.
Any facts that I might adduce in support of my distinction would by the sponsors of this theory be interpreted as 'strategical' retreat.
But if the occurrence of such strategical retreats be admitted, the theory in question ceases to be meaningful -any 'concession' that is not directly enforced is then strategical by definition- unless the strategical purpose of each 'concession' is established.
I maintain, though I cannot prove here, that this is possible in some cases but not in others -e.g. not in the cases of 'paternalistic' employers or in the cases of groups that are covered by the label of bourgeois radicalism.

[2] On the meaning that this term and the term Political Liberalism carry in this book, see Part III, ch. 2. 

[3] This resolves an apparent paradox that might puzzle the reader.
It does seem paradoxical to speak of decline of English liberalism in a period that covers the sweeping victories of Gladstone in 1880 and of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman in 1906.
The paradox disappears, however, when it is remembered that we are not concerned with party labels even where the continuity of a political organization is reinforced by (substantial) continuity of personal leadership, as was the case with the Gladstonian party.
In the latter case, the point I wish to make is illustrated by the split of the liberal party that occurred in the eighties.
Viewed superficially, it occurred on the question of Irish Home Rule; but most of those who renounced allegiance on this issue had also other reasons for doing so: they did not wish any longer to be towed along by the radical wing.

[4] Readers who feel this assumption to be unwarranted will do well to compare, e.g., the relevant parts of H. W. Laidler's Social-Economic Movements (1944). 

[5] We cannot go into the reasons for this attitude.
But it was not altogether a matter of sour grapes.

[6] Alexandre Millerand, later on President of the French Republic, rose into notoriety as a labor lawyer and entered the Chambre as a radical-socialiste.
The radicaux-socialistes were not socialists as a party but formed the left wing of bourgeois radicalism: the party label expresses very well the social situation of latter-day capitalism that I am trying to describe.
However, Millerand made his position more definitely socialist later on; and he had become the leader of a group of 60 deputies of more or less socialist persuasion when, in 1899, he accepted office in the Waldeck-Rousseau administration.
He thus was the first and for some time the only socialist to take office in bourgeois cabinet in one of the great nations.
Hence his name came to denote the practice which, however, caused no difficulties in the northern countries.

[7] On the Fabians, see below. &lsqb;J.
A. S. intended to discuss the Fabians in ch. 4, sec. but this chapter and section were not completed.&rsqb; 

[8] In England, things did not work out in this way or at least did so much less markedly.
The reasons for this, extremely interesting though they are, must not devote us.

CHAPTER 4 

&lsqb;Sozialpolitik and the Historical Method&rsqb; [1] 

&lsqb;1 SOZIALPOLITIK&rsqb; 

ECONOMISTS EXPERIENCED the influence of the new atmosphere as they had experienced that of early liberalism and as they were to experience, in our day, that of socialism.
In all these cases this meant not only or even primarily new facts and problems but also new attitudes and (extra-scientific) creeds [2] and hence, for a time at least, revolt against those restraints which in each epoch as it wears on and as initial enthusiasms cool, the men who are engaged in the work of analysis find it necessary to impose upon themselves.
The 'mercantilist' writers had not discovered that there was anything for an economist to do except to propose measures and fight for them; the economists of the 'liberal' age were at first in no better state, though they eventually did discover the difference between a theorem and a recommendation; and the economists of the period under discussion, yielding to what the reader may call either temptation or the call of duty, similarly deviated from the stony path that leads to scientific conquest.

&lsqb;(a) Influence upon Analytic Work.&rsqb; The manner in which and the degree to which the economists of that time allowed their analytic work to be influenced by the new spirit of economic policy differed greatly, however, as between countries and groups.
In England, continuity in research and teaching was never in serious danger.
The small body of English economists moved with the times, of course -which was not difficult for pupils of J. S. Mill- but did not jettison pieces of scientific apparatus along with old value judgments.
In part this was due to the fact that the average member of that body understood economic theory much better than did the average economist in any other country, and hence he was in a position to realize the full extent of the latitude it left for any social creed he might choose to embrace.
For the rest, that singularly happy state of things was simply an instance of the genuine freedom guaranteed by the English environment that removed many sources of irritation.
Opposition to what many people believed to be an alliance between economics and laissez-faire policy existed both within and without the small group of orthodox socialists.
But it did not amount to much.
In particular it did not amount to a new 'School of Thought.' &lsqb;A note indicated that J. A. S. intended to write a paragraph on the Fabians at this point.&rsqb;

In the United States scientific tradition was not anything like as strong.
But the 'radicalism' of the typical member of the economic profession did not go beyond the points covered by old doctrine: antagonism to protection and to 'monopolistic' big business, which then developed into the typical American economist's pet aversion.

The processes of competitive capitalism were also under fireðsome economists were sympathetic with the 'populationist' movement, others lent qualified support to the ideas of Henry George,' and views indicative of hostility to the capitalist order as such were not absent though very few voiced them as candidly as did Thorstein Veblen.
But that fire was weak.
The large majority of economists conformed to the bluff convictions of businessmen who did not as yet share the misgivings of their European peers.
No economist whom anyone would care to call 'leading,' in any sense whatsoever, identified himself with any radical scheme of social reform.

&lsqb;Not completed: J. A. S. evidently intended to sketch the development of social reform in France and Germany before going on to the paragraphs which follow.&rsqb;

I do not hesitate to say that this achievement was one of the most important in the records of the economic profession.
Having made this quite clear I hope that what follows will not be misunderstood.

That achievement, great as it was, evidently did not belong to the sphere of scientific analysis.
And since this is a history of scientific analysis, it does not in itself concern us here.
What does concern us is another aspect of it - which I readily concede is a less important one -namely its influences on teaching and research.
Appraisal of this influence will then offer an opportunity to touch upon, so far as it is necessary to do so, the problem of the economist's value judgments.

The efficiency of teaching indubitably suffered.
I have emphasized above the share that the academic lecture hall had in spreading the spirit of social reform.
The German 'socialists of the chair' certainly fulfilled the ideal of progressive politicians and laymen -the ideal of the professor who preached reform and denounces obstructing interests.
Lujo Brentano addressed his classes as he would have political meetings, and they responded with cheers and countercheers.
Adolf Wagner shouted and stamped and shook his fits at imaginary opponents, at least before the lethargy of old age quieted him down.
Others were less spirited and effective but not less hortatory in intent. [5] 
Such lectures need not necessarily be weak in the technical instruction they impart, but as a rule they are.
He who thinks this a cheap price to pay fol ethics and ardor will please consider for a moment where, say, internal med; cine would be if its teachers, instead of developing the analytic powers d their pupils, indulged in rhetoric about the glories of healing.
An increasing number of students left the universities and entered the practical vocation open to economists with an equipment that was nothing short of lamentable and some of the best of them left thoroughly disgusted. [6] 

&lsqb;(b) Verein für Sozialpolitik.&rsqb; As regards research, a credit item first claims recognition.
It has been pointed out above that the German economists' zeal for reform concentrated upon individual problems or measures much as did that of the Fabians in England: fundamental reconstruction of society was to come about in time, as a by-product rather than as the result of efforts directly aimed at it.
This procedure involves accumulation of facts on a large scale' and the impressive series of the Schriften des Vereins fur Sozialpolitik -188 'volumes' most of which actually consisted of several volumes- testifies to a relentless will to dig, to which we are indebted for an invaluable extension of our factual knowledge.
Much additional work of the same type was done by individuals and groups either in connection with or outside that corporate effort of the profession. [7] 
If, because of considerations of space' the Schriften are allowed to stand as the only example of this kind of analysis it must be understood that this instance is to illustrate what constituted the greater part of the work done by the economists of all countriesðin England, as before' it was done partly for Royal Commissions. [8] 

Many of the volumes presented work of a high grade that was not only exemplary in its minute attention to detail but also analytically significant and inspired by considerations of scientific as well as practical urgency.
The Verein's comprehensive price studies (begun in 1910) may serve as an example.

Most of them, however, were no better and no worse than such investigations were and are at all times and in all countries.
But an investigation into the influence of gold production, directed by Arthur Spiethoff (Der Einfluss der Gold erzeugung auf die Preisbildung, 1890-1913, vol. 149 of the Schriften), that was a part of them, rose far above the general level.
On the whole, however, the economists responsible for the reports that fill those volumes of the Schriften, cared little for analytic refinement.
They took no end of trouble with their facts, but most of them went straight from their impressions of the factual pattern to recommendations, just as would have any nonprofessional worker.
They neither used nor contributed to theoretical or statistical technique, in spite of their obvious opportunities for doing so.
And the analytic apparatus of economics did not improve but even deteriorated in their hands.

Moreover, if abilities adequate to describing the trade practices of distributors of milk plus a fervent allegiance to the ideals of the Verein -glorified no doubt by a little philosophy and other elements of German culture- were all a man needed in order to establish himself as an economist and, in due course, to receive academic preferment, we cannot be surprised that supply adapted itself to the character of demand.
Otherwise excellent men ceased to care for the higher spheres of scientific invention and rigor.
Men who cannot be described as otherwise excellent threw them overboard with a sigh of relief and prided themselves on doing so.
And though there always were a few who tried to keep the flag flying, [9] economic theory as understood in England was in many places almost completely in abeyance for several decades, not only as a field of research but also as a means of training students in scientific habits of mind.
When, in the first decade of this century, a reaction began to set in, under Austrian and foreign influence, against 'economics without thinking,' the full extent of the damage done revealed itself in the fact the people hardly knew what economic theory meant: many thought that it was a sort of philosophy of economic life or else simply methodology.
Many foreign observers laid all the blame for this state of things at the door of ti historical school.
But the historical school, though cultivating another purely scientific interest, still cultivated a scientific interest; it should not be held responsible for that substitution of convictions for performance.

&lsqb;(c) The Problem of 'Value judgments.'&rsqb; Concern about the future of oconomics may have been one of the reasons why an increasing number of men felt it desirable to shape the Verein into something more like a scientific society and' when this had to some extent been attained, to bring forward the question whether economists were within their rights when they took it upon themselves to deliver judgment -moral or other- on the phenomena they analyzed.
During the first decade of the century, this problem of the Wertured (value judgment) caused heated discussions which culminated in what almost amounted to a row at the Vienna meeting of 1909.
To many people it will seem obvious a priori that this attack upon the principle of the Verein's historic practice must have come from economists who were out of sympathy with the policies sponsored by it.
This however was not so.
The enemies of the Verein had of course always protested against its lack of scientific 'objectivity.' But within the Verein the most prominent leaders in that campaign for freedom from evaluation (Wertfreiheit) were M. Weber and Sombart,both of whom belonged to the radical wing of the Verein and were anything but exponents of capitalist interests.

[1 resp=ed] &lsqb;EDITOR'S NOTE.
This chapter was in an unfinished and unsatisfactory state.
It had no titles and no sub-titles; these were inserted by the editor.
My knowledge about it is gleaned from what J. A. S. said in the introduction to Part IV and from a folder which I found containing two sections of typescript clipped to their respective manuscripts.
This folder also contained a great many notes and pamphlets and reprints which J. A. S. apparently intended to use in his work of revision.
On the outside of the folder was written 'Part IV/4.' Originally, it had been 'Part IV/4, 5' but the 5 had been erased when the author decided to incorporate thematerial in a single chapter instead of in two separate chapters.

In Part IV, Chapter 1, Section 3, Plan of the Part, J. A. S. has this to say: 'Then follow comments on two allied groups of men and ideas that lend themselves to separate treatment, the group whose work centered in the contemporaneous interest in social reform and whose leaders were with singular infelicity dubbed "socialists of the chair" (Kathedersoncialisten): and the group that was called, and called itself, the historical school (Chapters 4 and 5).
The much-debated question of economists' value judgments will be touched upon in connection with the former and the famous "battle of methods" (and its American counterpart, the institutionalist controversy) in connection with the latter.'

The treatment of the socialists of the chair is very incomplete.
In fact, it looks as though a whole section on these people in Germany had been omitted.
It is obvious that the treatment of people of this type in France has been omitted.
The carbon of this particular section is dated December 17, 1943.
The carbon of the section on the historical school is dated January 10, 1943.
These were undoubtedly preliminary studies and would have been completely rewritten.
The section on the socialists of the change and value judgments is especially unsatisfactory, but it is published here because Schumpeter felt so keenly that the work of many economists has been and is inquired by their value judgements, and also that this need not be so with respect to their analysis.
This belief of his is obvious in all his writings.
The treatment of the historical school is also incomplete.
After some discussion of the older and younger historical schools and the Methodenstreit, there follows a discussion of historical economics outside Germany, especially in France and England.
But there is something about the United States and American institutionalism, which had been promised in the Plan of the Part&rsqb;.

[2] &lsqb;At top of this page a great many shorthand notes and the following statements in the hand of J.A.S.: 'I do not see what more I could say in order to protect from misunderstanding the following piece of plain speaking.'&rsqb;.

[5] I do not mean to assert that German lectures or seminars were exactly fascinating.
The two examples adduced were exceptional.
As a rule, the professor read from manuscript that was often yellow with age, or presided languidly over seminar noticings at which candidates for the Ph.D. read preliminary drafts of their theses.
Thb " the scene American visitors beheld and their experience may be one of the causes irreconcilable -and I think, exaggerated- hostility to the lecture method of teaching which we observe in many American universities. 

[6] However repugnant to scientific etiquette jokes and anecdotes may be, there are cases in which they illustrate a situation better than could anything else.

So I will ask offering two such illustrations.
The one is a definition of economics that obtained some currency at the time: 'economics, what is that? Oh, yes, I know . . . you are an economist if you measure workmen's dwellings and say that they are too small.' The other is a dictum I once heard from a very intelligent and accomplished German woman: 'I have taken courses and examinations in economics, but I know nothing and care less about it.
You see, I felt I had to comply with the fashion of "studying" at a university, but I did not mean serious work.
So I chose economics because all that as required there in order to satisfyexaminers is the ability to chat a little about ethics reform, control, and that sort of thing.' Of course, I do not mean to say that these; were the standards of most or even many teachers.
The significance of the anecdote should not be overrated.
But neither should it be equated to zero, not at least for the first three decades of the nineteenth century. 

[7] The importance of that effort, which as an effort of a national group of professional economists has no equal, makes it desirable to say a few words about its organization.
It was essentially a team-work arrangement.
Every member, especially every member of the large council, was free to suggest a project of research.
The Verein denoted which were to be taken up and then entrusted individuals or small committees with the direction of the research involved.
These in turn parceled out the work among .1 number of collaborators and integrated the results that were to be published in the Schiften.
Moreover, they arranged for discussions of those results at the meetings of the Verein, appointing 'reporters' (usually two) and other participants.
Success at these meetings was of some importance in a man's academic career.
&lsqb;Some of this information has already been presented in Chapter 1 of this Part.&rsqb; 

[8] To mention a few of those Commissions whose reports are particularly interesting on the standpoint of economic analysis: Shipping Dues (1853), Coal Supply (1866) Agriculture (1881), Housing (1885), Depression of Trade (1886, particularly the 3rd report, Gold and Silver (1887), Poor Laws (1909-especially the famous minority report).

[9] &lsqb;Note intended here on Diehl, Dietzel, Oppenheimer, and Lexis.&rsqb; 

CHAPTER 2 

&lsqb;Developments Stemming from the Marshall- Wicksell Apparatus&rsqb; 

&lsqb;1 THE MODERN THEORY OF CONSUMERS BEHAVIOR AND THE NEW THEORY OF PRODUCTION&rsqb; 

THE MODERN THEORY of consumers behavior developed almost wholly during the last quarter of a century so far as the doctrine is concerned that b actually used and taught by the sector of the economics profession that is primarily interested in theory in this sense.
But what was and is being developed consists in methods and results, mainly associated with the work of Fisher, Pareto, Barone, Johnson, and, if we do not mind adding a paper that remained practically unknown for a decade or more after its publication, Slutsky.
This means that the fundamental ideas were present before the close of the First World War, not in the form of embryonic suggestions only, but well worked out, mainly by authors of international reputation' in forms accessible, so we should think, to every professional theorist.
They had only lo sink in and to be clarified, amplified, applied, and occasionally straightened out in the process.
But little had to be added to them that was fundamentally new.
The situation was much as it was in the automobile industry: in spite of all the improvements and new gadgets, a modem motor car is still much the same kind of thing as the motor car of 19l4. [1] 
Exactly the same holds for what may still be called the new theory of production.
And the concept of elasticity of substitution illustrates well not only what has been done but also what could be done in this field under the given circumstances. [2] 

A historian' inspired by his observations about similar events in the past, might have expected that Walras would have missed the boat, that is, that his work, in an epoch that was able to understand him at last, would have been thrown into the limbo where dwell the works that, inadequately appreciated in their own time, were condemned on technical inadequacies of their apparatus when their real time had come.
This was not so, however.
The work on consumers' behavior and on production that can be fitted into his system and that, in part, was fitted in by Pareto, instead of preventing him from taking his proper place, produced rather a modernized Walrasian system.
This process extends from 1924, when Professor Bowley's Mathematical Groundwork of Economics made Walras' equilibrium system internationally accessible -already modernizing it in many spots- to 1939 when Professor Hicks's Value and Capital, or the first two parts of it, completed the task. [3] 
To some extent this book was particularly successful in unearthing Walrasian problems of which Walras himself had not been aware.
And, partly in its wake and partly independently, a rich stream of contributions was released from which I shall merely 'read by name' the works of Lange, Metzler, Mosak, and - only alphabetically last- Samuelson.
Much or most of this work pivots around questions of determinateness and around stability conditions and thus constitutes the bulk of the work of our day in the field of fundamental theory or even Grundlagenforschung.

&lsqb;2 THEORY OF THE INDIVIDUAL FIRM AND MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION&rsqb; 

Equally important' however' and much more important as regards direct applicability to practical questions and hence for the economic profession as a whole, is another development that objectively stems from Marshallðthc Theory of the Individual Firm and in connection with it, the Theory of Monopolistic or Imperfect Competition. [4] 
Everyone knows that this new arm of the economist's analytic engine was added, in different forms, by English and American authors who worked independently of one anotherða striking proof of the intellectual, still more than practical, need for this type of theory and a not less striking illustration of how the logic of the scientific situation may drive different minds along similar lines of advance. [5] 
In the United States, The Theory of Monopolistic Competition sprang, without any warning, fully armed from Professor E. H. Chamberlin's head in 1933 [6] and met with a corresponding success, which was as much due to the force and brilliance of his exposition as it was to the maturity of the scientific situation.
The work claimed to reconstruct the whole of value theory by blending or fusing the hitherto separate theories of monopoly and competition.
Nor was this all.
It also claimed to teach a new economic Weltanschauung from the standpoint of which practically all economic problems appear in a new light.
In any case the most important original contributions of the work -mainly contained in Chapters 4-7 on product differentiation and selling costs- met with very little fundamental dissent, if indeed with any.

But a whole literature that amplified and applied these contributions followed in its wake.

In England' Mrs.
Joan Robinson's Economics of Imperfect Competition, also in 1933, impinged upon a less unprepared profession and, for this and other reasons, was less spectacularly successful.
As we know, Piero Sraffa, in 1926, had thrown out the idea that appeal to the theory of monopoly was the remedy for the difficulties about equilibrium that had arisen in connection with increasing returns.
In doing so he had already suggested that actual conditions in industry will in general lie in the intermediate zone between monopoly and competition and that, since it was the competitive theory which held the field, it was then necessary 'to turn towards monopoly.' Finding monopoly thus released 'from its uncomfortable pen' (Robinson, op. cit. p. 4) in which It had existed, in seclusion from the main corpus of economic analysis, Mrs.
Robinson proposed to reconstruct the theory of value by allowing monopoly to 'swallow up the competitive analysis' very firm being a monopolist, that is, a single seller of its own product, and competition coming ill by bits until we reach the limiting case where a large number of such single sellers of perfectly substitutable products sell in a perfect market, and the demand for the product of each of them becomes perfectly elastic, the case usually described as perfect competition (op. cit. p. 5). [7] 
It should be observed that this concept of monopoly is not the traditional one.
In fact the traditional concept can be satisfactorily defined only by the criterion that it admits the application of the Cournot-Marshall theory of monopoly.

But this theory in turn presupposes the existence of a demand curve that is independently given and immune to influences from other firms upon the behaviour of the one under consideration.
Hence the traditional theory of monopoly is constitutionally unable to 'swallow up' any cases where these influences cannot be neglected, and hence the traditional concept of monopoly becomes inapplicable.

[1] While I think it necessary to emphasize this fact because it is quite essentisl in order to understand the present situation, I do not wish it to be misunderstood.
Such misunderstanding would be involved for instance in any impression the reader m41d conceive to the effect that emphasis upon that fact implies derogation either of ih performance of our age or of the talent that went into it: a physicist writing in a7le might have been equal in mental stature to Newton; but it was 'objectively' imposdbb for him to produce another work like the Principia Mathematica (1687): he wouS have had to bend to 'objectively' and 'relatively' lesser tasks.
Similarly, it is norellw tion upon either Frisch or Samuelson to include their performances in the catepq of elaborating or continuing work.
On the contrary, both performances illustratc wil the types of originality that were possible in the field of the theory of consumen' behavior at the time they wrote: botn performances produced novelties but novelties like the self-starter and not like the Otto motor.

[2] For a general survey of the nature and uses of total and partial elasticity of substitution, see again Allen, Mathematical Analysis, pp. 341-5, 372, 504, and 512.
The concept, first introduced in its simplest form by Hicks (Theory of Wages, 1932) and Joan Robinson (Economics of Imperfect Com1betition, 1933), was immediately put to good use by both authors in the formulation of propositions that acquire delightful simplicity thereby (e.g., see also J. R. Hicks, 'Distribution and Economic Progress: A Revised version review of Economic Studies, October 1936).
For a time the concept was therefore deservedly popular but this popularity was soon impaired by the related facts that it ceases to be so simple so soon as there are more than two goods or 'factors' under consideration and that it works with difficulty when applied to statistical data.
I regret my inability to survey the results of the considerable literature to which the concept has given rise.
See however the discussions in Revíew of Economic Studies, February 1934 and February 1936).
Another example of this type of gadget is A. P. Lerner's measure of monopoly power ('The Concept of Monopoly and the Measurement of Monopoly Power,' Review of Economic Studies, June 1934)

[3] Even in those two parts, Hicks did much more than modernize Walras.
So far as mere modernization goes, h e al so modern ized Marshall , and I do not mea n to su ggest that 'modernization' describes those two parts of Value and Capital adequately.
On the other hand, Hicks's treatment is much too brief to accomplish the modernization of Walras and Marshall completely; it should be said rather that he produced essential material for it.

[4] Still more than in other cases, I am anxious in this one to divest my emphasis upon a historical filiation from any semblance of derogation.
This emphasis seems imperative because of two different sets of facts.
First, Marshall, on the strength of his frequent use of the concept of the (small) individual industry, to which in particular most of his diagrams refer, has been sometimes accused of having neglected the economics of the individual firm.
But as we have seen, and as analysis of his argument (and of such concepts as a firm's special market or internal economies) could prove, he gave, on the contrary, quite unusual attention to the problems of the individual firm and offered suggestions that indeed called for development but force us, precisely because of this, to look upon later work, especially by Marshallians, as an offshoot from his.
Secondly, Marshall's concepts and treatment of the individual industry and of increasing returns invited criticism: their very shortcomings were fertile; they spoke with so certain a voice that the critic's constructive task was cut out for him.

[5] This and the fact that we have here to do with a broad movementin which many participate, though only few make the decisive hits that history records, stand out still more clearly if we take account also of the related literature on oligopolistic patterns.
We then discern a similar movement in the Northern countries (see especially F. Zeuthen, 'Mellem monopol og konkurrence,' Nationalfkonomisk Tidsskrift, 1929, end Problems of Monopoly and Economic Warfare, 1930) and in Germany (see von Stackelberg, Marktform und Gleichgewicht, 1934, who noticed and discussed most of the German as well as the non-German contributions). 

[6] Chapter 8 (on distribution), the contents of which were first presented in a paper read before the American Economic Association (at the meeting in Philadelphia, 1933) and which was then published in extenso in Explorations in Economics (in honor of F. W. Taussig, 1936), was added to the 2nd ed. of the book (1937).

Chapter 7 thh second chapter on selling costsðwas omitted from the Ph.D. thesis handed in at Harvard on April 1, 1927 in order to meet the time limit, although it was fully worked it out by then.
The thesis does not differ in any essential from the 1st ed. of the book and, since it was in the stage of final revision for several months before, does nol anything to Sraffa's article ('The Laws of Returns under Competitive Conditions'), which appeared in the Economic Journal, December 1926.
The author proposed the subject for a Ph.D. thesis as early as 1921, when he was a student at the University of Michigan (author's communication).
In spite of subconscious influences that may have come from early Marshallian training, we therefore have here a striking instance of subjective and objective originality and of originality of the purely theoretical type that owed nothing to 'the collection of direct empirical evidence,' though a 'guiding principle' certainly was to create a theory that would fit facts better than what Chamberlin conceived to be the theory of competition current at that time (author's communication).

It seemed worth while to abandon, in this case, the principle of sketchiness that governs our exposition, especially in this Part, not only because of the importance of the book thatðnext to Keynes's General Theory and with Hicks's Value and Capital and Hayek's contributionðmust certainly be considered as one of the most successful books in theoretical economics that the period since 1918 has produced but also because its author is not, like most authors mentioned in this book, beyond reach of personal interview.
And personal contact, though only one of several methods for studying the ways of the human mind and especially the manner in which original work emerges and takes effect, is an important one and particularly useful in providing a check on the others.
Three elements of scientific achievement are particularly obvious in this case: the maturity of the scientific situation; the ability to grasp an important idea with force and enthusiasm; and the ability to stay with it and to shut oneself off from the disturbing effects of other scientific ideas or aspects.

[7] In her Foreword and Introduction, Mrs.
Robinson not only acknowledged obligation to Marshall and Pigou but gave ample credit to Sraffa, to whose papersðboth the English and the Italian contribution mentioned in Part IV, ch. 7, sec. 8d-it is therefore necessary to recur in all questions that touch upon her fundamental analytic intentions.
This is rendered more difficult by the fact that Sraffa (see next sentence in our text) did not use the word Monopoly in the Robinsonian but in the usual sense.
But she also acknowledged indebtedness to, or a sort of partnership in the spirit with, a number of other fellow economistsof whom we must in particular notice three.
There was Harrod, whose share in the analysis of impurely or imperfectly competitive patterns must be valued more highly than his papers (including his 'Doctrines of Imperfect Competition,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1934; 'Imperfect Competition and the Trade Cycle,' Review of Economic Statistics, May 1936; and 'Price and Cost in Entrepreneurs' Policy,' Oxford Economic Papers, May 1939) would in them selves indicate, especially considering the dates of their publication.
And there were Shove and Kahn, whose names may, at some future time, owe the greater part of their recognition to Mrs.

Robinson's generous tributes.
These tributes were fully de served (as was Keynes's tribute to Kahn, see below ch. 5).
Both are scholars of a type that Cambridge produces much more readily than do other centers of scientific economics or rather of science in general.
They throw their ideas into a common pool.
By critical and positive suggestion they help other people's ideas into definite existence.
And they exert anonymous influence -influence as leaders- far beyond anything that can be definitely credited to them from their publications.
I take this opportunity to mention a point on which Mrs.
Robinson lays great emphasis in her Foreword and in deed throughout her book, the 'marginal revenue curve.' She gives credit, for both the thing and the word, to several of her contemporaries, particularly to Mr.
Harrod anel Professors Yntema and Viner.
It is quite natural that use of this convenient tool suggested itself at that time to many (including Chamberlin), especially to those who hall previously struggled with the clumsier Marshallian total curves.
We must not, however, forget that the tool was first used by Cournot, and no author of the 1920'5 or 1930's can have any objective claim to it.

CHAPTER 4 

Dynamics and Business Cycle Research 

LET US RECALL once more that here, as throughout this book, Dynamics means exclusively analysis that links quantities pertaining to different points of theoretic timeðin the sense that has been repeatedly explained beforeðand not the theory of evolutionary processes that run their courses in historic time: it is practically coextensive with sequence analysis and includes period analysis as a special case, but it is not coextensive with the theory of economic growth or development, or 'progress.' [1] 
Thus defined dynamics is a genuinely new departure.
We have indeed seen at various turns of our way, particularly in the case of Sismondi, that dynamic considerations in our sense intruded into economic analysis times out of number, chiefly by implication but also explicitly.
But the exact core of economics was nevertheless static and was believed to constitute a self-contained body of doctrine, a body moreover that embraced all or almost all of the essential insights.
This is obvious in the case of Walras.
But It also applies to Marshall.
He no doubt added plenty of extra-static considerations, chiefly about growth but also about sequences, so much in fact that he may be said to have posited the task of future dynamic theory (see e.g. Principles, p. 519), just as he posited the task of future econometrics; but though he presented material, viewpoints, and desiderata, he did not cross the Rubicon.

For the rest, we have noticed the suggestive pointers of Pantaleoni and Pareto, but there was no advance toward the goal to which they pointed.
By the phrase, 'crossing the Rubicon,' I mean this: however important those occasional excursions into sequence analysis may have been, they left the main body of economic theory on the 'static' bank of the river; the thing to do is not to supplement static theory by the booty brought back from these excursions but to replace it by a system of general economic dynamics into which statics would enter as a special case.
The realization of the fact that even a static theory cannot be fully developed without an explicit dynamical schema (Samuelson), [3] which we have noted before, is a first step in this direction, and if space permitted, a few others could be mentioned. [4] 
However, no attack on the whole front of Walrasian theory has as yet developed and the analogy with a building plot is still painfully apposite: an increasing number of workers sec the new goal; but for the time being this is practically all, since H. L. Moore's effort did not go substantially beyond comparative statics.
More positive success has attended the efforts to 'dynamize' aggregative theory.

&lsqb;1 DYNAMIZlNG AGCREGATIVE THEORY: MACRODYNAMICS&rsqb; 

This is understandable.
On the one hand, aggregative theory that reduces truly innumerable arrays of variables to half a dozen or even less can evidently stand up much better than could a Walrasian system under the complications that are inseparable from even the simplest dynamic schema.
As an illustration, consider so simple a dynamizing device as the introduction of lags.
Offhand and until more powerful methods are invented than are available now, there is very little we can say when we give different time indices to all the quantities that enter the Walrasian system, except that it becomes unmanageable thereby.
But this is no longer so if the only variables we have to take care of are 'consumption,' 'investment,' and a national income that is identically equal to current consumption plus current investment.

This is a homogeneous second order difference equation with constant coefficients, which is very easy to solve by an elementary technique that lies ready at hand and yields certain economically interesting results.
The temptation to avail oneself of so tremendous a simplification is almost irresistible and impervious to the objections that might be raised on theoretical grounds. [6] 
No wonder, then, that the early 1930'S were fertile in such aggregative schemata -R.
Frisch's macrodynamics. [7] 
Not all of them were mathematically exact of course-a fuller survey would have to mention several important ones that were presented by non-mathematical economists such as Professor von Hayek.
It should be carefully observed that this drive toward macrodynamics was in itself quite independent of any wish for a closer alliance of economic theory with statistical figures: macrodynamics would have asserted its claims even if theorists' attitudes to statistics had not changed at all as compared with the preceding period, and as a matter of fact several writers who displayed no symptoms of such a change in attitude were just as anxious as anyone can be to secure the advantages of aggregative simplification.

&lsqb;2 THE STATISTICAL COMPLEMENT: ECONOMETRICS&rsqb; 

But, on the other hand, the equally strong drive toward a numerical ecnomics, an economics that would be statistically operational, is also a dominant factor in our scientific situation.
And this factor, however independent of the desire for a simplification of the pattern of economic theory per se, also favors macrodynamic methods.

For with few exceptions the aggregative variablesðparticularly if their number be augmented by price levels and interest ratesðare easy to identify with our most important time series.
As an outstanding example' which displays both tendencies closely united and which constitutes so important an element in the economic research of our time that it cannot be omitted from any sketch of it, however brief, I mention the work of Tinbergen. [8] 
His numerous aggregative schemata, most of which use many more variables to start with than do those of other authors, are in the first instance set up on the basis of purely theoretical considerations that are extremely simpleðso much so that it is perhaps more enlightening to speak of common-sense considerations: they embody, in a system of (almost always) linear equations with constant coefficients, the definitions of obviously important aggregates (definitional equations); the relations that common sense suggests should subsist between them (balance equations); and relations that are supposed to describe the behavior of classes of households and firms (behavior or 'decision' equations). [9] 
This involves the fundamental principle that construction of the theoretical set-up should precede the statistical work: the relations themselves are not suggested by statistical observations; they are postulates and not results. [10] 
Statistical figures are to 'explain' the numerical values of some variables by given numerical values of others by the method of multiple correlation -a process which also eliminates those 'explanatory' variables whose partial regression coefficients indicate the insignificance of their influence The system is then, by process of successive substitutions, reduced to 'final' equations that are held to depict the economic mechanism. [11] 
In it self, every step in this procedure is open to serious criticisms, about which no more can be said than that they should not blind us to the greatness of this pioneer effort.
Since most of these criticisms are of a statistical nature, the statistical work of Frisch -partly taken account of by Tinbergen- and his group should at this point be mentioned again, particularly the work of Haavelmo, who during his brief sojourn in the United States, without holding a teaching position, exerted an influence that would do credit to the lifetime work of a professor. [12] 
In any case, however, the economist who accepts macrodynamics as it stands, with or without its statistical complement, may speak of conquest already achieved- and not only of a developing attack and of the increasing clearness of a goal, which is all that we are able to record in the matter of dynamizing the Walrasian or Paretian system.

&lsqb;3 THE INTERACTION OF MACRODYNAMICS AND BUSINESS CYCLE RESEARCH&rsqb; 

Exactly as macrodynamics has been and is being propelled by the specifically econometric drive -the tendency toward reasoning in terms of statistical figures- so both the theoretical and the numerical components of macrodynamic work have been propelled by the preoccupation with business cycle problems.
This preoccupation is, as we have already seen, a salient characteristic of our time.
From the foregoing analysis of the factors that produced macrodynamics and in particular statistical macrodynamics, we may infer that this development would have occurred even if there were no such thing as the particular kind of fluctuations that are commonly identified as business cycles.
From what has been said earlier in this Part and in Part IV we may infer that preoccupation with the phenomena of business cycles would have increased, as compared with the times before 1914, even if modern macrodynamics had not emerged.
But it is obvious that both developments were bound to reinforce one another and that, on the one hand, the methods, materials, and results of business cycle research encompassed more and more of general economics and, on the other hand, the methods, materials, and results of modern macrodynamics evolved principally with a view to serving business cycle research, [13] so much so that reference to business cycles intrudes even into the titles of many macrodynamic publications of much wider range. [14] 
It is now easy to formulate more precisely the nature and results of this interaction.

We have seen in Part IV, Chapter 8, that all the fundamental ideas concerning the phenomenon of business cycles were present before 1914. [15] 
What our period added, besides critical development of these ideas, was in the first instance the new wealth of data and new statistical methods of handling them.
Even the econometric program, barring the 'higher' mathematics, had been carried out by such outstanding students as Juglar, Mitchell, and Spiethoff. [16] 
But incomparably greater possibilities have offered themselves since 1919.
Some writers were content to use whatever figures the arms of their analytic apparatus could grasp.
An outstanding example is Professor Pigou, whose Industrial Fluctuations (1st ed. 1927), though remaining a 'theoretical' work, nevertheless, owing to the new material, differs greatly from the kind of work that an economist of the same type would have produced before 1914.
Others displayed a tendency to plunge into the statistical material directly and to scrap the existing apparatus as well as the existing explanatory hypotheses.

We may illustrate this tendency by two instances that in other respects have very little to do with one another, namely the work of the Harvard Committee (W.
M. Persons) and the work of Mitchell.

[1] This is repeated here because many modern authors do identify dynamics with The theory of growth.
The chief authorities for our terminology are Frisch and Hicks Prominent examples of another terrninology are Harrod (see especially Towards a Dynamic Economics,1948) and Stigler.
An intermediate position is held by many, c.g by Charles F. Roos (Dynamic Economics, 1934).
I also repeat that my insistence on this distinction is due not to any wish to quarrel about words but merely to a wish to avoid confusion.

[3] See Foundations, Part n, especially ch. XI.
I take the opportunity to submit that there and in Appendix B, also in 'Dynamic Process Analysis,' his contribution to A Survey of Contemporary Economics (H.
S. Ellis, ed.), Professor Samuelson has performed a most meritorious pedagogical task; there is no better introduction to the meaning and techniques of modern dynamics.

[4] Pressing considerations of space are, however, not the only reason for refraining: on the one hand, I do not wish to blur the main contours by details; on the other hand, I do not wish this sketch to degenerate into a bibliography.
Going over the volumes of Econometrica is almost all that the reader needs in order to find the ropes. 

[6] It is convenient to defer consideration of these objections and of an important qualiEcation that should be added to them.
But let us note at once that our example also illustrates the fact that economists are prone to yield to the further temptation to improve upon the situation by introducing additional simplifications: in our exam. ple, it is not only the reduction in the numbers of variables which simplifies things but also the postulate that the coefficients are constant; if they were not, the equation would not be so easy to handle.

[7] We mention here only one example, namely Professor Frisch's own schema pre sented in his powerful paper, 'Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dy namic Economics,' Economic Essays in Honour of Gustav Cassel (1933).

The reader will find many others in Tinbergen's survey article quoted in the next footnote.

[8] In the long list of Professor J. Tinbergen's publications the one that is perhaps most suitable to serve as an introduction, to American and English readers, of his theoretical and statistical methods is his Statistical Testing of Business-Cycle Theona: I, A Method and its Application to Investment Activity; and II, Business Cycles in U.S. 1919-3z (League of Nations, 1939).
Still more useful as a survey of what may be called now the earlier work in dynamics is his article 'Suggestions on Quantitative Busi ness Cycle Theory,' Econometraca, July 1935.
Both titles are unduly unassuming.
Just now the reader should ignore the specific reference to business cycle researchðthe rea son for which will be explained presentlyðand accept the first as a treatise on, and the latter as a survey of, general dynamics.

[9] For examples, see the work cited in the preceding footnote.
It should be remembered that Tinbergen's publications of this type begin (so far as I know) in 1934.

[10] This is the fundamental difference between the methods of Tinbergen and those of W. C. Mitchell, whose methods will be touchedupon below.

[11] I feel in duty bound to offer my apologies to Professor Tinbergen for this sort of report.

But I hope that he and the reader will prefer even these jejune sentences to the bare reference to his works which not every reader can be trusted to follow up.

[12] The bulk of his teaching has been embodied in a number of papers published in Econometrica.

But see especially Trygve Haavelmo, 'The Probability Approach in Econometrics,' Supplement to Econometrica, July 1944 (Cowle's Commission Papers, New Scries 4).

[13] A simple way for the reader to realize this is to glance over Professor H. M Somers' 'Classified Bibliography of Articles on Business Cycle Theory,' appended to the volume of Readings in Bustness-Cycle Theory, to which reference has been mgde already, or to some of the other bibliographies mentioned there (p. 444), particularly the one by Professor R. A. Gordon. 

[14] This is why, speaking of macrodynamics per se and not intending to speak oi business cycle research specifically, I had, nevertheless, in a previous footnote, to quote two of Tinbergen's works whose titles carry this connotation.
The reason why, Witl what might seem uncalled-for pedantry, I insist on this point is simply that it is es sential to a correct diagnosis of the modern scientific situation.

[15] This also applies to Professor von Hayek's theory, if it is permitted to link it up with that of Professor von Mises.
If it is not, I apologize.

[16] Spiethoff's preliminary presentation of his business cycle analysis as a whole disl not, it is true, appear before 1923, and his comprehensive work, as well as its tranF Iation into English, is still expected.
But this delay was and is caused by the heroic rt tempt to master vast materials single-handed.
As regards Mitchell, the reference above is to his book of 1913.
