
Randomised trial of irinotecan plus supportive care versus supportive care alone after fluorouracil failure for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer

Introduction

Colorectal cancer is one of the most common adult malignant tumours, affecting one person in twenty in the USA and in most developed countries.
Although 40-50% patients may be cured with surgery, many will develop metastatic disease.
For these patients, treatment with fluorouracil, usually modulated by folinic acid, is the only option and the median survival is 10-12 months.
When the tumour progresses after first line treatment with fluorouracil, there is no standard treatment. 
Survival is short and associated with weight loss, onset or worsening of tumour-related symptoms, and poor quality of life.
Because cytotoxic agents have low response rates and can be associated with severe side-effects, many patients receive supportive care.
In first-line chemotherapy, fluorouracil with folinic-acid is better than supportive care (or delayed chemotherapy) for survival and quality of life, but the value of second line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer has not yet been proven.

Irinotecan is a topoisomerase I inhibitor that blocks the DNA replication step of the enzyme, leading to multiple single-strand DNA breaks, which eventually blocks cell division.
In phase II studies, irinotecan has objective antitumour activity in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, even in those with documented fluorouracil-resistant tumours, with response rates of 11-23%.
An additional 40% of patients experienced tumour stabilisation for a median of 5 months.
Common side effects included delayed diarrhoea, neutropenia, early cholinergic syndrome, nausea and vomiting, alopecia, and asthenia.
The dose limiting toxic effects were severe diarrhoea and neutropenia. 

The trial we report was started in 1995 to compare irinotecan with supportive care alone for survival, quality of life, and other clinical variables.
The participants were patients with metastatic colorectal cancer in whom fluorouracil chemotherapy had failed.

Methods

Endpoints

Overall survival was the primary endpoint.
The secondary objectives were the impact of treatment on performance status, bodyweight, tumour-related symptoms, and quality of life.

Patients' selection

To be eligible for randomisation, patients had to meet the following criteria:
histologically proven metastatic colorectal cancer;
progressive metastatic disease documented on the basis of either a 25% increase in the size of target lesions or an increase in carcinoembryonic antigen by 1·25 times an initial reference value and a baseline value of more than 10ugl/L , which allowed inclusion of patients with non-measurable disease (peritoneal carcinomatosis and pelvic recurrences);
progression documented by two measurements not separated by more than 6 months and tumour progression while on fluorouracil or within 6 months of the last fluorouracil infusion;
having had one adjuvant and/or no more than two palliative fluorouracil-based regimens; age 18-75 years; WHO performance status 0-2; neutrophils 2x10 9/L or more; platelets 100x10 9/L or more; total bilirubin 1·25X the institutional upper normal limit (IUNL), or less;
liver transaminases 3xIUNL (in case of liver metastases:
bilirubin xxx and transaminases 5xIUNL ), or more; serum creatinine 135 &mgr;mol/L or less;
wash-out of 4 weeks for radiotherapy or chemotherapy; and written informed consent.

Patients with the following criteria were not eligible: 
previous treatment with topoisomerase I inhibitors, bulky disease (involving more than 50% of the liver volume or 25% of the lung volume, or abdominal mass >10 cm), metastases in the central nervous system, or unresolved bowel obstruction or diarrhoea.

Randomisation and study treatments 

Registration forms were sent to Rhône-Poulenc Rorer Research and Development (Antony, France) where eligibility criteria were electronically checked.
If all criteria were fulfilled, the randomisation was done electronically in the ratio of irinotecan to supportive care 2:1, with stratification by centre.

In the irinotecan group, patients were given best supportive care and irinotecan 350 mg/m2 , diluted in 250 mL normal saline or dextrose, over a 90 min intravenous infusion every 3 weeks (or 300 mg/m2 if aged >70 years or WHO performance status 2, according to previously recognised risk factors for developing toxicity).
Guidelines were provided for the management of side effects (panel).
Treatment was to be started no longer than 8 days after randomisation. 
In the supportive-care alone group, patients were given best supportive care and were seen every 3 weeks.
Supportive care was defined as the best care available as judged by the attending physician, according to institutional standards for each centre.
Supportive care included antibiotics, analgesics, transfusions, corticosteroids, or any other symptomatic therapy (except irinotecan or other topoisomerase I inhibitor), and/or assistance of a psychotherapist.
Localised radiation therapy to alleviate symptoms such as pain was allowed provided that the total dose delivered was in the palliative range according to institutional standards.

Analysis of best supportive care 

Supportive care and concomitant medications were reported at each visit (every 3 weeks in both groups).
They were classified with the WHO dictionary;
further subclassification was done with the WHO code for anatomical therapeutic class (ATC). 
With these classifications, analgesics were divided into opioids or non- opioids and analysed in 3-week blocks.

Follow-up

Patients visited the investigator for assessment and treatment every 3 weeks.

All adverse events were reported according to the National Cancer Institute's common toxicity criteria.
After discontinuation of treatment in the irinotecan group, patients were regularly assessed as in the supportive care group (tumour status, symptoms, or side-effects, every 3 weeks) until death or for at least a year.
Beyond 1 year, only date of death was traced.

Quality of life

Quality of life was assessed with the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-C30 questionnaire (including five function scales, one global health status scale, and nine symptom scales), which was filled in at baseline, at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, and then every 6 weeks.
After discontinuation of treatment in the irinotecan group, patients continued to fill in QLQ-C30 questionnaires every 6 weeks as in the supportive-care group.

Statistical analysis

Survival curves were estimated with the Kaplan-Meier method on the randomised population and compared by a two-tailed logrank test.
With p=0·05 and power of 0·80, 264 patients were required (176 in the irinotecan group and 88 in the supportive care group) to show a significant difference in 1-year survival from 20% (supportive care) to 35% (irinotecan). 

The randomisation was stratified by centre.
A retrospective stratification was planned to take into account the baseline prognostic factors (sex, age, performance status, weight loss, presence of liver metastases, site of primary tumour, number of metastatic sites, response to and duration of fluorouracil treatment as well as its intent [adjuvant or palliative], haemoglobin, white blood cells, platelets, lactate dehydrogenase, transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, protein, and carcinoembryonic antigen).

The analysis was by intention to treat and patients were analysed according to the arm to which they were assigned.
The association of prognostic factors with survival was estimated with Cox's proportional hazards model for censored survival data. 
Model selection for identifying the variables having an effect on survival was based on a forward stepwise procedure.
P values to enter and to remove were 0·05 and 0·06, respectively.
After the prognostic model had been determined, the effect of treatment after adjusting for other prognostic factors was estimated by including it in the model.
Survival without weight loss of more than 5% survival without performance-status deterioration, and pain-free survival were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared with a two- tailed logrank test.
Quality-of-life variables were compared with multivariate and univariate analyses of variance on values at baseline, during study, on patients' worst score over the trial period, and changes from baseline.
Kaplan-Meier estimates and logrank tests were done on time to definitive quality-of-life deterioration, with eight different thresholds for deterioration.

Results

Patients' data

189 patients were randomly allocated irinotecan and supportive care and 90 patients were allocated supportive care alone (figure 1).
The patients' characteristics are shown in table 1. 
These characteristics were similar for both groups except for performance status (more patients having poor performance status in the supportive-care group) and anaemia.
Only 27 (14%) of patients in the irinotecan group and nine (10%) in the supportive-care group were assessed by carcinoembryonic antigen only, with mean antigen ratios versus reference values of 2·24 and 2·83, respectively.

Six patients in the irinotecan group did not receive irinotecan. 
Irinotecan was given for a median of 4·1 (0·7-12·6) months and 172 (91%) patients received their first infusion within 8 days of randomisation. 40 (21%) patients in the irinotecan group received subsequent anticancer chemotherapies (31 a fluorouracil regimen, nine a drug other than irinotecan).
In the supportive care group 28 (31%) of patients received chemotherapy (21 a fluorouracil regimen, nine other drugs, and one irinotecan). 17 (19%) patients in the supportive-care group received chemotherapy within 1 month of randomisation compared with two (1%) in the irinotecan group. 
Concomitant medications at baseline were similar in both groups and consisted mainly of analgesics.

Overall survival

Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival are presented in figure 2.
There were 123 (65%) events in the irinotecan group, median duration of which was 9·2 (range 0- 18·9) months.
The survival probability for this group at 6 months was 72·2%, at 9 months 52·6%, and at 12 months 36·2%.
In the supportive-care group there were 71 (79%) events, the median duration of which was 6·5 (range 0·7-19·3) months.

In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 54·1%, at 9 months 29·1%, and at 12 months 13·8%. 
Median follow-up was 12·9 months.
Patients in the irinotecan group lived significantly longer than those in the supportive-care group (p=0·0001).
This benefit appeared after 2 months and became more apparent throughout the study period. 1-year survival was 36·2% and 13·8% in the irinotecan and supportive-care groups, respectively.
Median survival was 9·2 and 6·5 months, respectively. 

A univariate Cox's model showed that patients with performance status 0 or 1 shared the same prognosis, which was notably better than that for patients with performance status 2.
Figure 3 shows that the benefit of treatment occurred in all performance-status groups.
With a performance status of less than two there were 98 (60%) events in the irinotecan group, median duration of which was 10·5 (range 0-18·9) months.
The survival probability for this group at 6 months was 76·3%, at 9 months 57·2%, and at 12 months 40·1%.
In the supportive-care-alone group there were 53 (77%) events, median duration 7·4 (0·7-19·3) months.
In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 62·5%, at 9 months 33·2%, and at 12 months 16·2%.
With a performance status of two there were 24 (92%) events in the irinotecan group, median duration of which was 5·1 range 0·3-18·5) months.

The survival probability for this group at 6 months was 46·2%, at 9 months 26·9%, and at 12 months 15·4%. 
In the supportive-care group there were 18 (86%) events, the median duration of which was 3·5 (range 1·1-11·0) months.
In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 26·5%, at 9 months 15·9%, and at 12 months 7·9%.
Multivariate Cox's regression confirmed the importance of other known prognostic factors (table 2).
When the treatment group was included in the model, the survival benefit for the irinotecan group remained significant ( p=0·001 ).

Secondary endpoints

Survival without weight loss of more than 5% ( p=0·018 ) and survival without performance-status deterioration ( p=0·0001 ) were significantly longer in the irinotecan group.
More patients with a performance-status of worse than 0 at baseline improved their performance status: 35% versus 11% ( p=0·002 ).
Pain-free survival in patients without pain at baseline (figure 4) was significantly longer in the irinotecan group than in the supportive care group ( p=0·003 ), despite a higher proportion of patients on opioids in the supportive-care group.
There were 61 (73%) events in the irinotecan group, median duration of which was 6·9 (range 0·3-17·2) months.
The survival probability for this group at 6 months was 56·8%, at 9 months 36·6%, and at 12 months 18·8%.
In the supportive-care group there were 26 (79%) events, median duration 2·0 (0-13·0) months.
In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 31·5%, at 9 months 14·7%, and at 12 months 4·9%.
Within 23 weeks of randomisation, the rate of patients with opioid consumption by 3-week blocks ranged from 25% to 34% in the irinotecan group and from 40% to 56% in the supportive-care group.

In the quality-of-life analysis, compliance of patients was about 80% in both groups at the beginning of study and decreased during the study to about 50%.

Compliance decreased more rapidly in the supportive care group, probably due to earlier deterioration in the patients. 
On difference from baseline multivariate analysis of variance was significant ( p=0·0001 ).

The univariate analyses of variance were significantly in favour of the irinotecan group for the cognitive functioning score ( xxx ), the global quality-of-life score ( xxx ), the pain score ( xxx ), dyspnoea ( xxx ), appetite loss ( xxx ), and financial-impact scores ( xxx ).
The diarrhoea score was significantly better in the supportive-care group ( xxx ).
Analyses on worst patient score during the study are shown in table 3: all results were significantly in favour of irinotecan except for emotional, nausea, sleep disturbance, and financial scores.
Diarrhoea score was significantly lower in the supportive-care group.
Time to definitive quality-of-life deterioration was significantly longer in the irinotecan group, whichever the chosen threshold for deterioration (all p values xxx ).

Safety

Table 4 shows the incidence of grade 3 or 4 adverse events (drug related or not) by patient.
Patients on supportive-care alone experienced a high incidence of severe adverse events, especially pain and asthenia, although significantly more patients in the irinotecan group experienced severe events, especially neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea.
Two (1·1%) of 183 patients treated with irinotecan died of drug-related causes although, in one, the association with adverse events (diarrhoea and/or febrile neutropenia) has not been clearly established. 
Admission for adverse events occurred in 136 (72%) of patients in the irinotecan group and 57 (63%) of patients in the supportive-care-alone group for a cumulative median of 15 (range 1-168) days and 11 (2-87) days, respectively.

Discussion

This study showed that treatment with irinotecan and supportive care alone, compared with supportive care, prolonged the life of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.
This benefit was clinically meaningful because the probability of surviving 1 year was 2·6 times greater in patients given irinotecan compared with that of patients given supportive care alone.
Other efficacy endpoints, such as survival without weight loss, survival without performance status deterioration, pain-free survival, and quality-of-life, were all significantly in favour of irinotecan.

The survival advantage for the irinotecan group remained highly significant after adjustment of performance status, a well-recognised prognostic factor.
More generally, the multivariate regression showed that the difference in survival between the two groups remained significant even after adjusting for the effect of well-known prognostic factors.
The survival data were also consistent with those observed in the phase II studies of irinotecan.

The study also showed an advantage for irinotecan for quality of life.
The results were consistent with other clinical variables (performance status deterioration, weight loss, and pain control).
The analysis of the EORTC QLQ-C30 symptoms scale was consistent with the safety data.
This suggests that the EORTC QLQC30 questionnaire is sensitive, contrary to a previous report.

The safety profile of irinotecan was acceptable.
The incidence of treatment- related grade 3 or 4 diarrhoea with irinotecan (21%) was lower than that reported in previous studies (39%).
This result, observed in a multicentre trial, is probably accounted for by the more rigorous implementation of guidelines for the management of diarrhoea than in earlier studies. 
Grade 3-4 neutropenia was reported in 22% and grade 3-4 vomiting in 14% of patients.

Asthenia, pain, and neurological symptoms were more frequent in the supportive- care group.

Some say that patients with advanced cancer who are treated with supportive care alone will have a short but peaceful end to their life, protected from the side effects of chemotherapy. 
Our study showed that as many as 67% of patients receiving supportive care experienced severe symptoms and as a result, 63% were admitted for a median of 11 days.
Furthermore, irinotecan improved the symptoms of patients and delayed the onset of tumour-related symptoms such as performance-status deterioration, weight loss, and pain.
These data were supported by the quality-of-life analysis which suggested that the side-effects of irinotecan were favourably balanced by reduced tumour-related events.

We have shown a survival advantage and a clinical benefit from second-line chemotherapy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer no longer responding to fluorouracil.
Many patients had poor prognostic factors, which implies that the results will be applicable in the daily practice.
The value of irinotecan was confirmed in terms of survival, quality of life, and other clinical variables.
Irinotecan can therefore be recommended as the standard second-line therapy in colorectal cancer and as a new reference for forthcoming clinical trials.

Table 1

Safety guidelines for treatment with irinotecan

Side effect.
Treatment.


Cholinergic syndrome.
Atropine sulphate (0·25 mg subcutaneously), if severe, prophylactic treatment at further cycles.


Nausea/vomiting.
Systemic prophylactic antiemetics.


First loose stool .
Early high-dose loperamide (4 mg at the first loose stool, then 2 mg every 2 h for 12 h after the last loose stool for a maximum of 48 h).


Diarrhoea for >24h.
Oral prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotherapy—eg, fluoroquinolone (to prevent the risk of severe infection).


Diarrhoea for >48h.
Admission to hospital for parenteral support and replacement of antidiarrhoeal treatment—eg, octreotide .


Grade 4 neutropenia or grade 3 or 4 diarrhoea .
Dose reduction at further cycles: 300 mg/m2 then 250 mg/m2 (or 250 mg/m2, then 200 mg/m2 if start dose 300 mg/m2 ).


Table 2

Baseline characteristics

Irinotecan (n=189).
Supportive care (n=90).


Sex (men/women).


Median age (range, years).


WHO performance status.


Weight loss >5%.


With symptoms.


Primary tumour site.


Colon right.


Colon left.


Rectum.


Number of organs involved.


Sites of metastases.


Liver.


Lung.


Peritoneum.


CEA.


Median CEA concentration (range; mg/L) .


Documentation of tumour progression by CEA increase only.


Mean increase (CEArand/CEAref) for those assessed by CEA only.


Documented tumour progression while on previous fluorouracil.


Previous treatment.


Surgery.


Radiotherapy.


Chemotherapy.


Adjuvant only.


One regimen for metastatic disease with or without adjuvant.


>2 regimens for metastatic disease with or without adjuvant.


Best response to previous fluorouracil for metastatic disease .


Complete/partial regression.


Stabilisation.


Progression.


Abnormal biological value.


Haemoglobin xxx .


White blood cells >83109/L.


LDH/IUNL.


Alkaline phosphatases >IUNL.


CEA>10 mg/L.


Median haemoglobin concentration (range; g/L).


Table 3

Multivariate Cox's analysis

Risk.
ratio.
p.


Treatment group.


Irinotecan and supportive care.


Supportive care alone.


Weight loss during previous 3 months (%).


WHO performance status.


Haemoglobin (g/L) .


Liver metastases.


Alkaline phosphatases (3UINL).


Number of organs involved.


Table 4

Worst score during study for each EORTC QLQ-C30 scale

Irinotecan (n=158) mean (SE).
Supportive care alone (n=73) mean (SE).
p.


Functioning scale.


Physical.


Role.


Cognitive.


Emotional.


Social.


Global quality of life.


Symptoms.


Fatigue.


Nausea/vomiting.


Pain.


Dyspnoea.


Sleep disturbance.


Appetite loss.


Constipation.


Diarrhoea.


Financial impact.


Table 5

Patients with National Cancer Institute common toxicity criteria grade 3 or 4

Adverse event.
Irinotecan.
Supportive care alone.


Anaemia.


Leukopenia/neutropenia.


Thrombocytopenia .


Fever or infection with grade 3 or neutropenia .


Nausea.


Vomiting .


Diarrhoea.


Constipation .


Cholinergic syndrome.


Asthenia.


Mucositis.


Anorexia.


Cutaneous signs.


Neurological symptoms.


Cardiovascular symptoms.


Pain (abdominal excluded).


Abdominal pain.


Infection (without grade 3 or 4 neutropenia).


Any grade 3 or 4.


Figure 1

Trial profile

Figure 2

Probability of survival of the 279 patients

Figure 3

Probability of survival according to performance status

Figure 4

Probability of pain-free survival in 116 patients without pain at baseline
