
HOPE IN A VIAL

Will there be an AIDS vaccine anytime soon?

It wasn't supposed to be this hard.
When HIV, the virus responsible for AIDS, was first identified in 1984, Margaret M. Heckler, then secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, predicted that a vaccine to protect against the scourge would be available within two years.
Would that it had been so straightforward.

Roughly 20 years into the pandemic, 40 million people on the planet are infected with HIV, and three million died from it last year (20,000 in North America).
Although several potential AIDS vaccines are in clinical tests, so far none has lived up to its early promise.
Time and again researchers have obtained tantalizing preliminary results only to run up against a brick wall later.
As recently as two years ago, AIDS researchers were saying privately that they doubted whether even a partially protective vaccine would be available in their lifetime.

No stunning breakthroughs have occurred since that time, but a trickle of encouraging data is prompting hope to spring anew in the breasts of even jaded AIDS vaccine hunters.
After traveling down blind alleys for more than a decade, they are emerging battered but not beaten, ready to strike out in new directions.
"It's an interesting time for AIDS vaccine research," observes Gregg Gonsalves, director of treatment and prevention advocacy for Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York City. 
"I feel like it's Act Two now."

In the theater, Act One serves to introduce the characters and set the scene; in Act Two, conflict deepens and the real action begins.
Act One of AIDS vaccine research debuted HIV, one of the first so-called retroviruses to cause a serious human disease.
Unlike most other viruses, retroviruses insinuate their genetic material into that of the body cells they invade, causing the viral genes to become a permanent fixture in the infected cells and in the offspring of those cells.
Retroviruses also reproduce rapidly and sloppily, providing ample opportunity for the emergence of mutations that allow HIV to shift its identity and thereby give the immune system or antiretroviral drugs the slip.

Act One also spotlighted HIV's opposition--the body's immune response--which consists of antibodies (Y-shaped molecules that stick to and tag invaders such as viruses for destruction) and cytotoxic, or killer, T cells (white blood cells charged with destroying virus-infected cells).
For years after infection, the immune system battles mightily against HIV, pitting millions of new cytotoxic T cells against the billions of virus particles hatched from infected cells every day.
In addition, the immune system deploys armies of antibodies targeted at HIV, at least early in the course of HIV infection, although the antibodies prove relatively ineffectual against this particular foe.

As the curtain rises for Act Two, HIV still has the stage. 
Results from the first large-scale trial of an AIDS vaccine should become available at the end of this year, but few scientists are optimistic about it: a preliminary analysis suggests that it works poorly.
Meanwhile controversy surrounds a giant, U.S.-government-sponsored trial of another potential vaccine slated to begin this September in Thailand.
But waiting in the wings are several approaches that are causing the AIDS research community to sit up and take notice.
The strategies are reviving the debate about whether, to be useful, a vaccine must elicit immune responses that totally prevent HIV from colonizing a person's cells or whether a vaccine that falls somewhat short of that mark could be acceptable.
Some scientists see potential value in vaccines that would elicit the kinds of immune responses that kick in soon after a virus establishes a foothold in cells.
By constraining viral replication more effectively than the body's natural responses would, such vaccines, they argue, might at least help prolong the lives of HIV-infected people and delay the onset of the symptomatic, AIDS phase of the disease.

In the early 1990s scientists thought they could figure out the best vaccine strategy for preventing AIDS by studying long-term nonprogressors, people who appeared to have harbored-HIV for a decade or more but who hadn't yet fallen ill with AIDS. 
Sadly, many of the nonprogressors have become ill after all.
The key to their relative longevity seems to have been "a weakened virus and/or a strengthened immune system," says John P. Moore of Weill Medical College of Cornell University. 
In other words, they were lucky enough to have encountered a slow-growing form of HIV at a time when their bodies had the ammunition to keep it at bay.

Not Found in Nature?

AIDS VACCINE developers have struggled for decades to find the "correlates of immunity" for HIV--the magic combination of immune responses that, once induced by a vaccine, would protect someone against infection.
But they keep coming up empty-handed, which leaves them with no road map to guide them in the search for an AIDS vaccine.
"We're trying to elicit an immune response not found in nature," admits Max Essex of the Harvard School of Public Health.
As a result, the quest for an AIDS vaccine has been a bit scattershot.

To be proved useful, a candidate AIDS vaccine must successfully pass through three stages of human testing.
In phase I, researchers administer the vaccine to dozens of people to assess its safety and to establish an appropriate dose.
Phase II involves hundreds of people and looks more closely at the vaccine's immunogenicity, its ability to prompt an immune response. 
In phase III, the potential vaccine is given to thousands of volunteers who are followed for a long time to see whether it protects them from infection.
Phase III trials for any drug tend to be costly and difficult to administer.
And the AIDS trials are especially challenging because of an ironic requirement: subjects who receive the vaccine must be counseled extensively on how to reduce their chances of infection. 
They are told, for instance, to use condoms or, in the case of intravenous drug users, clean needles because HIV is spread through sex or blood-to-blood contact.
Yet the study will yield results only if some people don't heed the counseling and become exposed anyway.

The first potential vaccine to have reached phase III consists of xxx , a protein that studs the outer envelope of HIV and that the virus uses to latch onto and infect cells.
In theory, at least, the presence of xxx in the bloodstream should activate the recipient's immune system, causing it to quickly mount an attack targeted to xxx if HIV later finds its way into the body.

This vaccine, which is produced by VaxGen in Brisbane, California --a spin-off of biotech juggernaut Genentech in South San Francisco--is being tested in more than 5,400 people (mostly homosexual men) in North America and Europe and in roughly 2,500 intravenous drug users in Southeast Asia.
The results from the North American/European trial, which began in 1998, are expected to be announced near the end of this year.

Many AIDS researchers are.
skeptical of VaxGen's approach because xxx normally occurs in clumps of three on the surface of the virus, and the company's vaccine employs the molecule in its monomeric, or single-molecule, form.
Moreover, vaccines made of just protein generally elicit only an antibody, or humoral, response, without greatly stimulating the cellular arm of the immune system, the part that includes activity by cytotoxic T cells.
A growing contingent of investigators suspect that an antibody response alone is not sufficient; a strong cellular response must also be elicited to prevent AIDS.

Indeed, the early findings do not seem encouraging.
Last October an independent data-monitoring panel did a preliminary analysis of the results of the North American/European data. 
Although the panel conducted the analysis primarily to ascertain that the vaccine was causing no dangerous side effects in the volunteers, the reviewers were empowered to recommend halting the trial early if the vaccine appeared to be working. 
They did not.

For its part, VaxGen asserts that it will seek U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval to sell the vaccine even if the phase III trials show that it reduces a person's likelihood of infection by as little as 30 percent.
Company president and co-founder Donald P. Francis points out that the first polio vaccine, developed by Jonas Salk in 1954, was only 60 percent effective, yet it slashed the incidence of polio in the U.S. quickly and dramatically.

This approach could backfire, though, if people who receive a partially effective AIDS vaccine believe they are then protected from infection and can engage in risky behaviors.
Karen M. Kuntz and Elizabeth Bogard of the Harvard School of Public Health have constructed a computer model simulating the effects of such a vaccine in a group of injection drug users in Thailand.
According to their model, a 30 percent effective vaccine would not slow the spread of AIDS in a community if 90 percent of the people who received it went back to sharing needles or using dirty needles.
They found that such reversion to risky behavior would not wash out the public health benefit if a vaccine were at least 75 percent effective.

The controversial study set to begin in Thailand is also a large-scale phase III trial, involving nearly 16,000 people. 
It combines the VaxGen vaccine with a canarypox virus into which scientists have stitched genes that encode xxx as well as two other proteins--one that makes up the HIV core and one that allows it to reproduce.
Because this genetically engineered canarypox virus (made by Aventis Pasteur, headquartered in Lyons, France) enters cells and causes them to display fragments of HIV on their surface, it stimulates the cellular arm of the immune system.

Political wrangling and questions over its scientific value have slowed widespread testing of the xxx .
Initially the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and the U.S. Department of Defense were scheduled to conduct essentially duplicate trials of the vaccine.
But NIAID pulled the plug on its trial after an examination of the data from a phase II study showed that fewer than 30 percent of the volunteers generated cytotoxic T cells against HIV.
And in a bureaucratic twist, this past January the White House transferred the budget for the Defense Department trial over to NIAID as part of an effort to streamline AIDS research.

Peggy Johnston, assistant director of AIDS vaccines for NIAID, says she expects there will be a trial of the vaccine but emphasizes that "it will be a Thai trial;
we won't have any [NIAID] people there on the ground running things."

Critics cite these machinations as a case study of politics getting in the way of progress against AIDS.
"There's little science involved" in the trial, claims one skeptic, who wonders why the Thais aren't asking, "'If it's not good enough for America, how come it's good enough for us ?
'" Others point out that the trial, which was conceived by the Defense Department, will answer only the question of whether the vaccine works; it won't collect any data that scientists could use to explain its potential failure.

Partial Protection

Into this scene comes Merck, which is completing separate phase I trials of two different vaccine candidates that it has begun to test together.
In February, Emilio A. Emini, Merck's senior vice president for vaccine research, wowed scientists attending the Ninth Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections in Seattle with the company's initial data from the two trials.

The first trial is investigating a potential vaccine composed of only the HIV gag gene, which encodes the virus's core protein. 
It is administered as a so-called naked DNA vaccine, consisting solely of DNA.
Cells take up the gene and use it as a blueprint for making the viral protein, which in turn stimulates a mild (and probably unhelpful) humoral response and a more robust cellular response [see illustration].
Emini and his colleagues reported that 42 percent of volunteers who received the highest dose of the naked DNA vaccine raised cytotoxic T cells capable of attacking HIV-infected cells.

The second trial employs the HIV gag gene spliced into a crippled adenovirus, the class responsible for many common colds.
This altered adenovirus ferries the gag gene into cells, which then make the HIV core protein and elicit an immune response targeted to that protein.
Emini told the conference that between 44 and 67 percent of people who received injections of the adenovirus-based vaccine generated a cellular immune response that varied in intensity according to the size of the dose the subjects received and how long ago they got their shots.

Merck is now beginning to test a combination of the DNA and adenovirus approaches because Emini predicts that the vaccines will work best when administered as part of the same regimen.
"The concept," he says, "is not that the DNA vaccine will be a good vaccine on its own, but that it may work as a primer of the immune system," to be followed months later by a booster shot of the adenovirus 'vaccine.
A possible stumbling block is that most people have had colds caused by adenoviruses.
Accordingly, the immune systems of such individuals would already have an arsenal in place that could wipe out the adenovirus vaccine before it had a chance to deliver its payload of HIV genes and stimulate AIDS immunity.
Increasing the dose of the adenovirus vaccine could get around this obstacle.

Emini says he and his co-workers are emphasizing cellular immunity in part because of the disappointing results so far with vaccines designed to engender humoral responses. 
"Antibodies continue to be a problem," he admits.
"There are a handful of reasonably potent antibodies isolated from HIV-infected people, but we haven't figured out how to raise those antibodies using a vaccine."

Lawrence Corey of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle agrees:
"You'd like to have both [a cellular and an antibody response], but the greatest progress has been in eliciting a cellular response," says Corey, who is also principal investigator of the federally funded HIV Vaccine Trials Network.

Antibodies are important, too, because they are the immune system's first line of defense and are thought to be the key to preventing viruses from ever contacting the cells they infect. 
Corey says that vaccines that are designed primarily to evoke cellular immunity (as are Merck's) are not likely to prevent infection but should give someone a head start in combating the virus if he or she does become infected.
"Instead of progressing to AIDS in eight years, you progress in 25 years," he predicts.
But, Corey adds, it is unclear whether a vaccine that only slowed disease progression would stem the AIDS pandemic, because people would still be able to spread the infection to others despite having less virus in their bloodstream.

Finding a way to induce the production of antibodies able to neutralize HIV has been hard slogging for several reasons. 
For one, the virus's shape-shifting ways allow it to stay one step ahead of the immune response.
"The thing that distinguishes HIV from all other human viruses is its ability to mutate so fast," Essex says.
"By the time you make a neutralizing antibody [against HIV], it is only against the virus that was in you a month ago."

According to many scientists, vaccines using a logical molecule, xxx --the protein the virus uses to invade immune cells, as discussed above--haven't worked, probably' because the antibodies that such vaccines elicit bind to the wrong part of the molecule.
xxx shields the precise binding site it uses to latch onto CD4, its docking site on immune cells, until the last nanosecond, when it snaps open like a jackknife. 
One way to get around this problem, suggested in a paper published in Science three years ago by Jack H. Nunberg of the University of Montana and his colleagues, would be to make vaccines of xxx molecules that have previously been exposed to CD4 and therefore have already sprung open.
But those results have been "difficult to replicate," according to Corey, making researchers pessimistic about the approach.

Another possible hurdle to getting an AIDS vaccine that elicits effective anti-HIV antibodies is the variety of HIV subtypes, or clades, that affect different areas of the world.
There are five major clades, designated A through E.
Although clade B is the predominant strain in North America and Europe, most of sub-Saharan Africa--the hardest-hit region of the globe--has clade C.
The ones primarily responsible for AIDS in South and Southeast Asia--the second biggest AIDS hot spot--are clades B, C and E.

Several studies indicate that antibodies that recognize AIDS viruses from one clade might not bind to viruses from other clades, suggesting that a vaccine made from the strain found in the U.S. might not protect people in South Africa, for example. 
But scientists disagree about the significance of clade differences and whether only strains that match the most prevalent clade in a given area can be tested in countries there.
Essex, who is gearing up to lead phase I tests of a clade C-based vaccine in Botswana later this year, argues that unless researchers are sure that a vaccine designed against one clade can cross-react with viruses from another, they must stick to testing vaccines that use the clade prevalent in the populations being studied. 
Cross-reactivity could occur under ideal circumstances, but, he says, "unless we know that, it's important for us to use subtype-specific vaccines."

Using the corresponding clade also avoids the appearance that people in developing countries are being used as guinea pigs for testing a vaccine that is designed to work only in the U.S. or Europe.
VaxGen's tests in Thailand are based on a combination of clades B and E, and in April the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative expanded tests of a clade A-derived vaccine in Kenya, where clade A is found.

But in January, Malegapuru William Makgoba and Nandipha Solomon of the Medical Research Council of South Africa, together with Timothy Johan Paul Tucker of the South African AIDS Vaccine Initiative, wrote in the British Medical Journal that the relevance of HIV subtypes "remains unresolved.
" They assert that clades "have assumed a political and national importance, which could interfere with important international trials of efficacy." 

Early data from the Merck vaccine trials suggest that clade differences blur when it comes to cellular immunity.
At the retrovirus conference in February, Emini reported that killer cells from 10 of 13 people who received a vaccine based on clade B also reacted in laboratory tests to viral proteins from clade A or C viruses.
"There is a potential for a substantial cross-clade response" in cellular immunity, he says, "but that's not going to hold true for antibodies.
" Corey concurs that clade variation "is likely to play much, much less of a role" for killer cells than for antibodies because most cytotoxic T cells recognize parts of HIV that are the same from clade to clade.

Johnston of NIAID theorizes that one answer would be to use all five major clades in every vaccine.
Chiron in Emeryville, Calif., is developing a multiclade vaccine, which is in early clinical trials.
Such an approach could be overkill, however, Johnston says.
It could be that proteins from only one clade would be recognized "and the other proteins would be wasted," she warns.

Whatever the outcome on the clade question, Moore of Weill Medical College says he and fellow researchers are more hopeful than they were a few years ago about their eventual ability to devise an AIDS vaccine that would elicit both killer cells and antibodies.
"The problem is not impossible," he says, "just extremely difficult."
