
Will We Survive?

As host and pathogen evolve together, will the immune system retain the upper hand?

The human species has existed in something like its present form for about 200,000 years.
During that time, the immune system has presumably played a crucial role in our ability to weather exposure to parasites, bacteria, viruses, toxins and other hazards that assert themselves by interacting with our biochemistry.
The relationship, one must note, has been an ongoing, mutual one in which all parties have adapted to each other through a variety of means, from open warfare to accommodation and even symbiosis.
As the relationship has proceeded, neither we nor our cohabitants have stood still in an evolutionary sense.
Such a long run should by itself give us confidence that our species will continue to survive, at least insofar as the microbial world is concerned.
Yet such optimism might easily transmute into a tune whistled whilst passing a graveyard. 

Changes in some key aspects of humanity's conditions of existence have created the uncertainty.
As a result, our immune system has never before faced more daunting challenges. 
For perhaps a century -a trivial amount of time from an evolutionary perspective- about 20 percent of us have lived in modern industrial society, an artificial environment of our own construction, notably free of parasites and many pathogens to which our immune system responds.
Good news, perhaps. 
Yet questions arise concerning the effect underemployment might have on our defenses.

The immune system may no longer enjoy the luxury of time. 
Air travel, major population growth and the emergence of megacities have vastly increased the ease with which people can become exposed to agents of disease.
For their part, the microbes have not been resting on their laurels.
New ones continually come into being.
A virus now exists that attacks the very defenses on which we rely for survival-the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
The Legionella bacterium, the Lyme disease spirochete and the Rift Valley fever virus also exemplify nature's ability to challenge the immune system radically.

Even old pathogens invent new tricks.

Recently evolved drug-resistant strains of the tuberculosis bacillus have been plaguing industrial urban centers.
Will such developments change the comfortable deadlock?
Will Homo sapiens and the microbes continue to coexist, or will one side win?

An important part of the answer to that question can be found in the evolutionary history of the immune system.
We need to look back over a few hundred million years to when the earliest vertebrates evolved from their invertebrate ancestors, for at that time the immune system first appeared.
The inquiry turns up a significant fact: the immune system has always served the sole purpose of defense against infection.
No other external factor shaped it.

This observation is demonstrated today by those rare experiments of nature in which infants are born with an immune system that does not function because one critical gene has mutated.

If left untreated, these infants will die from infection. 
They can survive only in a sterile isolator, known as a bubble.

The same natural experiment shows that tasks such as protection against aberrant growth within the host do not affect the immune system's development.
Bubble babies and their animal counterparts-mice with a congenital thymus defect, for example-do not have a high incidence of most types of cancer.

These natural experiments eliminate two other suggested functions.
Some investigators have proposed that the immune system stimulates the growth of red blood cells.
Yet participants in the natural experiment still make normal numbers of erythrocytes. 
Other workers have proposed that the immune system can prevent some forms of sterility by warding off the effects of paternal leukocytes.
Yet mice that have a congenital thymus defect, if kept alive in a semisterile environment, reproduce quite well.

The findings do not necessarily mean that the immune system cannot be made to attack cancer cells or to facilitate reproduction. 
But one has to be realistic:
it will not be easy to persuade the system to perform chores to which it has not grown accustomed in the course of evolution.

In addition to singleness of purpose, consideration of the immune system's history reveals a second major feature: the immune system appears to have evolved through a process of elaboration. 
It has achieved its protective power by incorporating a variety of defenses that existed in the invertebrates.
It did not merely override those mechanisms and replace them with something better.

Among the perfectly serviceable systems that protect invertebrates are wandering phagocytic cells as well as proteins, floating freely in body fluids, that can bind to invading bacteria.
These defenses can perform most tasks of the full-fledged immune system, except for mounting heightened responses against organisms that are previous invaders.
The ancient defenses have no specific memory-a hallmark of the immune system proper.

Having evolved in the presence of these older, nonadaptive defenses, the immune system incorporates some of their elements for its own purposes.

It is not fanciful to trace the modern complement system or antigen-presenting cells back to these ancestral forms.

One finds such ancient molecules as complement receptors on modern lymphocytes.
Our macrophages sport major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules-structures derived from the phagocytic cells of invertebrates.

The immune system seems to have created its ability to recognize antigens and to mount attacks against them by evolving from and incorporating "dumb" defensive proteins such as complement. 
The nervous system evolved in much the same way.
It probably became more intricate to carry out more complex functions.
Thus, the oldest part, the brain stem, mediates automatic functions, such as heartbeat and breathing.
The cerebellum governs complex motor movements, whereas the cerebrum functions as the seat of consciousness, mediates perception and coordinates the whole.

The resemblance between the two systems extends to structure as well as function.
A cytoskeleton consisting of its characteristic array of specialized proteins can be recognized in organisms as primitive as yeast.
The cytoskeleton does more than passively support the cell's structure.
In our neurons, for example, it serves as the machinery that moves vesicles containing transmitters from the cellular interior to the synapse. 
In the immune system, antigen-presenting cells, using a similar method, are able to ingest foreign material, break it down and present its essential components to the exterior world.

Unfortunately, we cannot trace most of the evolutionary steps that the immune system took.
Virtually all the crucial developments seem to have happened at an early stage of vertebrate evolution, which is poorly represented in the fossil record and from which few species survive.
Even the most primitive extant vertebrates seem to rearrange their antigen receptor genes and possess separate T and B cells, as well as MHC molecules.
Thus has the immune system sprung up fully armed.
It is regrettable that so few of the evolutionary experiments of the transition to vertebrates seem to have survived.

Only for the immunoglobulins can we discern much of an evolutionary story.
Presumably, the first system comprised but a single immunoglobulin-producing gene.
It quickly re-created itself, establishing a series of duplicates, each making a different immunoglobulin molecule.
Then control mechanisms emerged that could direct the production of separated gene segments that were able to recombine.
Yet even humans retain in a corner of their immune system something of the primitive arrangement:
the genes that control the production of the lambda light-chain immunoglobulin, one form of which consists of only two members.

Molecules of immunoglobulin, the proteins most characteristic of the immune system, combine with antigen to flag its presence to other leukocytes or to initiate destructive chain reactions of complement.
Such proteins can be grouped into superfamilies. 
The fruit fly, Drosophila , has been found to employ molecules that resemble those of the immunoglobulin superfamilies.
Their role, however, is not immunologic.
As cellular adhesion molecules, they guide the growth of neurons in larvae.

Some immunologically significant molecules are even older. 
Bacteria, for example, have transporter proteins.
These proteins are homologous to those that our own cells use to carry peptides to MHC molecules.
There the proteins load the peptides into the antigen-presenting groove.
The cogent feature of the immune system is that its proteins have diversified and specialized to an extent unprecedented, except in the nervous system.
Only a very few of the molecules of the immune system are really new.
Natural selection -in Francis Crick's words, the "tinkerer"- needs only a limited number of parts in its erector set.

Recent research on the immune systems of fish and amphibians has identified another interesting survival.
These cold-blooded vertebrates have relatively slow-acting immune systems, equipped with poorly diversified antigen receptors.
The tadpole of the common frog, for example, makes only about 100 different antibody molecules.
On the other hand, frogs have potent defense peptides, called magainins, that punch holes in bacterial cell walls.
Molecules that function as magainins do, such as the squalamines of sharks and the cecropins made by insects (and perhaps by many other species) have been found throughout the animal kingdom-even in warm-blooded creatures.

The immune system, then, probably passed much of its early life in a sluggish, relatively inefficient style, playing a fairly minor role in defense.
The system came fully into its own only much later on, after the revolution of warm-bloodedness enabled our cells to multiply rapidly.

As the immune system grew in importance and complexity, it underwent a series of internal reorganizations, which involved compromises or trade-offs of one kind or another.
The fact that the metabolic resources of an organism are not unlimited makes such economic choices necessary.
Investment in effector systems, the cutting edge where killer cells and antibodies wallop bacteria and viruses, must be balanced by investment in regulatory systems necessary for keeping the entire enterprise under control. 
Thus, in the human immune system there are more regulatory T cells, known as CD4 cells, than any other kind.

One cannot avoid the language of capitalism here, any more than one can in discussing ethology.
Immunologists will surely follow in the footsteps of those colleagues who have for quite a while been discussing the investment of deer in antlers or the balance of advantage to hummingbirds in finding fresh flowers.
What a perfect microcosm of the market the lymph nodes and spleen offer.
In the germinal centers of these organs, mutating B cells furiously compete with one another for the tiny amount of antigen needed for survival. 

The winners are assured the reward of massive replication. 
Cells that do not find antigen die.

Where nature fails to provide evidence to support the inquiry into evolution, immunologists have borrowed a tool from economists: computer modeling.

Franco Celada of the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York City and Philip E. Seiden of the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center have formulated a cellular automaton for closely modeling the cellular events that take place within the immune system. 
Sets of simulated T cells, B cells and antigen-presenting cells appropriately endowed with receptors and MHC molecules are (metaphorically) shaken up with antigen and then allowed to undergo a series of interactions. 
The automaton responds well to antigenic stimulation, mounting recognizable primary and secondary responses.

More interesting results come when it is asked deeper questions-for example, how many MHC types per individual are optimal?
The program answers by balancing the advantage of being able to present more and more peptide against the disadvantage of deleting more and more of the T cell repertoire. 

Recall that in addition to presenting antigen, the MHC molecule identifies tissue as self.
So an increase in the number of MHC molecules means an increase in the number of self-antigens.
A corresponding number of T cells must therefore be deleted if autoimmunity is to be avoided.
Furthermore, loss of MHC types ultimately reduces the flexibility of response to invading organisms.

After a few runs, the model comes up with a number of between four and eight, which agrees remarkably well with what has been observed.
Although not the first mathematical model of the immune system, this is by far the most user-friendly tool available for exploring these evolutionary issues.
Its real test will come when it attempts to answer questions to which the solutions are not known.

A related problem is why the antigen-presenting groove in MHC molecules accommodates a sequence of just nine amino acids. 
The hard-nosed biochemist might argue that this size is an accident of the geometry of the MHC molecule.
The soft-nosed evolutionary biologist would wonder whether that explanation alone is sufficient.
Instead he or she might argue that the length of the groove may reflect a balance of selective pressure between two opposing needs:
on the one hand, to conserve as much of the T cell repertoire as possible and, on the other, to prevent parasites from building proteins invisible to the T cell system.
For example, if a groove accommodated only six amino acids, nearly all possible hexapeptides might be present in self-proteins, with the result that nearly all T cells would be deleted.
But if a groove accommodated 14 amino acids, parasites could evolve so as to avoid using bindable peptides in their proteins.

One can imagine primitive vertebrates trying out various lengths to find out which one suits best.
Testing this possibility lies just beyond the range of present computer models but will surely become possible in the future.

How can one reconcile this tremendous need for economy, and indeed evident economy in so many aspects, with features of the immune system that seem so profligate?
Leukocytes, for instance, occur in several repeated sets, each equipped with a more or less complete array of receptors for antigen.
We can make a fair guess that the advantage of this repetition lies in allowing specialization.
Different immunoglobulins are needed to deal appropriately with different parasites ( IgA, say, is the one most effective against worms in the gut), and each immunoglobulin requires its own clone of B cells.
Similarly, cytotoxic T cells provide an appropriate defense against viruses such as influenza and intracellular bacteria such as Listeria .
And the larger division into T cells and B cells reflects, at least in part, the advantage of giving to the former responsibility for self-tolerance and thereby permitting the latter to indulge in hypermutation.
It would never work to combine the two. 
Imagine the T cell population's getting purged of self-reactive cells in the thymus (which does happen) and then generating new receptors by hypermutation (which happens only to B cells); disastrous autoimmunity would ensue!
We can now begin to derive some answers to our question.

I would like to do so by dispelling a possible misconception. 
So far this account of the evolution of the immune system might suggest that the process had mostly played itself out long ago.
In fact, the reverse is true.
The human immune system is almost certainly now evolving more rapidly from generation to generation than ever before.
Much of this change affects polymorphic genes, genes that express many different forms of the same MHC or antibody molecule.
Our immune system is intensely polymorphic, much more so than any other part of the body.

These molecules vary from one individual to another to such an extent that a single combination is hardly ever duplicated. 
This state of affairs reflects the fact that our parasites breed far more rapidly than we do and can therefore evolve more rapidly.

As with other forms of polymorphism, such as that of wing color in butterflies, this diversity is presumably maintained by selection in favor of heterozygotes.
Heterozygotes are individuals that have different copies of each gene, in this case the genes that contribute to the variability of antigenbinding molecules.
An individual clearly enjoys an advantage by having, in addition to the four to eight genetic loci mentioned earlier, two different genes at each locus.
Such an arrangement maximizes the chances of being able to bind at least one peptide from any one viral or bacterial protein.

Polymorphism in the MHC is indeed more complex and more interesting than simple selection in favor of immune responses to parasites.
The reverse also occurs: a vigorous process in all likelihood creates a rich variety of genes whose products suppress the immune response.
Such genes are committed to limiting an immune reaction that directly damages the body in the course of responding to a pathogen-they suppress "friendly fire," so to speak.

Nowhere is the balance between the two kinds of control displayed better than in leprosy.
The disease afflicts more than one million people in the tropics throughout the world. 
It disappeared from Europe only in the past few centuries, for reasons unknown. (Some geographic signs remain.
NATO nuclear submarines are based at Lazaretto Point at Holy Loch, so called because of the leprosarium once located there.) Individuals infected with the leprosy bacterium respond in various ways. 

Tore Godal of the World Health Organization found that most patients throw off the infection and are left only with traces of reactivity in their immune system.

Others acquire a "tuberculoid" infection, in which the body makes a vigorous but only partially effective T cell response.
A third group develops a "lepromatous" condition in which the T cell response is suppressed.
The skin fills up with infective bacteria, but life can proceed more or less normally.
It is in those cases in which the response has not been so fully suppressed, that immunopathology tends to manifest itself.

René de Vries and his colleagues at University Hospital, Leiden, have amply demonstrated that the MHC genes primarily have control of the spectrum of responses.

No doubt these immunosuppressive genes survive in the industrial societies for the most part as relics of chronic infections such as leprosy.
In doing so, they provide us (albeit inadvertently) with a measure of protection against the autoimmune and allergic diseases.

Donald J. Capra and his associates at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas conducted a large survey of people suffering from insulin-dependent diabetes who responded to an appeal over the local radio.
They found far fewer MHC genes of a specific type ( HLA-DQw1.2 ) within their sample than would have been expected from the frequency in normal control individuals.
Presumably, those genes suppress the immune response that destroys the beta cells in a person's pancreas.
Similar observations have been made with other HLA genes in other immunologic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and vasculitis.

The protective effect seems hardly large enough to account for the survival of such genes (the diseases are rare and afflict mainly an aged population).
They nonetheless excite considerable research interest.
At Deutsches Rheuma Forschungszentrum in Berlin, we believe protection is mediated by inhibitory cytokines such as transforming growth factor ß.
We are searching for treatments that will mimic these genetic effects.
In taking this view, we have been much influenced by the pioneering work of Howard L. Weiner of Harvard University on multiple sclerosis, published earlier this year.

The evolution of immunosuppressive mechanisms is but one example of how hosts and parasites affect one another's development through time; there are many others.
Indeed, the more we learn about the molecules of the immune system, the more striking such adaptations appear.
Certain viruses, for instance, use molecules of the immune system for gaining access to host cells.

Exploitative in this way as pathogens are, their very cleverness can on occasion be exploited by humankind.
John P. Tite and his colleagues at Wellcome Research Laboratories in England have defined a sequence within a bacterial invasin, a protein that facilitates invasion of host tissue.
The sequence binds to an integrin, a host-cell surface protein.
Tite's group hopes to use this information to build molecules that might block invasin.

Scientists at Immunex Corporation in Seattle have been intrigued by the discovery that certain viruses make cytokine-binding proteins.
The proteins increase virulence, presumably by inhibiting the immune response.
Immunex workers are building similar proteins in order to combat such autoimmunologic diseases as rheumatoid arthritis.

At the other end of the spectrum, numerous viral DNA sequences have become integrated into the human genome and are never expressed (most of the coat-color varieties prized by fanciers of pet mice result from genes' having been knocked out by just such viral sequences).
Or the sequences may get used for purposes that have nothing to do with viral replication.
For example, certain viral genes that encode endogenous superantigens have been retained in the genome of the mouse.
From that location, they delete the products of other genes called V genes.
V genes govern the production of proteins that serve as attachment sites for bacterial superantigens One can begin to make sense of this coevolution by considering the principle of the "shared agenda" introduced by Richard Dawkins of the University of Oxford. 
The DNA of a dormant endogenous virus has the same needs as the DNA of the host: they share the same agenda almost completely. 
In contrast, a virus that kills its host after a short latent period has little shared agenda.
One ought to add that full dormancy (incorporation into host DNA) is rather unusual, as most viruses do not make reverse transcriptase, the enzyme necessary for incorporation.

The need for transmission of the parasite tends to enforce a common agenda, and almost without exception that is the direction in which evolution has moved.
Only new forms of infection, such as viruses that have recently been transmitted from another host species, bring with them their own separate agendas.
Seldom if ever does it pay a parasite to kill its host, a fact for which we should be profoundly grateful.

Can we be confident that this tradition of live and let live can persist in the modern world?
Opportunities have never been greater for mixing hosts and parasites that have no previous experience of one another.
About a billion human bengs join the world's population each decade.
Many of them crowd into the megacities of the developing countries.

High-speed aircraft transportation facilitates the easy movement of millions of people around the globe.
The recent past offers illustrations of what can happen when people meet a pathogen from which neither their evolution nor their immune system protects them.

One need only recall the English ditty about the malaria-infested west coast of Africa:
The Gulf of Benin, the Gulf of Benin, Where few come out, Though many go in.

The mixings of the maritime centuries are a second reason the immune system must be changing more speedily than ever before. 
Robert C. Gallo of the National Cancer Institute has convincingly argued that HIV probably had its origins in a complex passage of the virus from simians to humans.
There is little doubt that the worldwide influenza epidemics have the same kind of origin, starting perhaps when a new variety of virus crosses a species barrier and is then quickly spread around the world by travelers.

Although our cleverness in manipulating the immune system continues to grow in sophistication, our best natural defense against most pathogens, new and old, consists of the immune system's polymorphism.
It enables us to counteract the advantage that pathogens enjoy because of their ability to evolve rapidly. 
So far our storehouse of variability has enabled us to survive.

Might we count on more radical defenses, such as a further elaboration of structure?
Might the control system, for example, arrive at a qualitatively different level of complexity? 
We cannot count on such a development as a possible further line of defense.
All of the existing structures were anticipated in earlier forms of life.
And there is no sign that new ones will emerge ab ovo.

Rising standards of living and the consequent reduction of the impact of infection on natural selection will be the main forces producing rapid change.
We are likely to see in response to the protean challenge of microorganisms variation in the relative frequency of such polymorphic genes as those of the MHC.
Later, full-scale gene replacement will occur. 
Isolation from the complete range of pathogens also enables us to conserve the storehouse of genetic variability that is our chief defense.
As long as polymorphisms are unused, they remain available, at the ready, like missiles in their silos. 

All these developments should better fit the system for its changing tasks in the modern world.
We can confidently predict that these adaptations will on the whole be beneficial, although just what they will be is unpredictable.
We can expect the loss of seemingly deleterious genes to be more conspicuous than the acquisition of beneficial ones.

The possibility even exists that the MHC genes that confer susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis or multiple sclerosis might gradually disappear.
This development would have little to do with any evolutionary effect the diseases might have-after all they afflict older individuals who have had ample opportunity to reproduce.
It is more likely to happen because the infections that selected for the maintenance of these genes have been eliminated.
From the point of view of an industrialized society, the genes seem harmful, although no doubt they served our infection-riddled ancestors well.

Because we know so little about which MHC genes are needed for which infections, detailed predictions of this kind are difficult. 
At the start of the Iliad, Homer ascribes the plague among the Acheans to arrows shot by the irate Apollo.
Would that the god could tell us about the influence of the MHC on his choice of targets!

This overall trend toward a diminishing selection for infection-resistance genes has obvious hazards.
As we lower our genetic defenses against the old infections, we will almost certainly increase our susceptibility to new ones.

We can comfort ourselves with the knowledge that evolution has moved slowly, maximizing the pros over the cons through many generations, although we need also to remember that human evolution is now moving far faster than ever before.

In comparison with this major trend, other evolutionary forces seem to exert a relatively minor effect.
Our growing ability to track the grossly damaging genes mentioned at the beginning of this article and to eliminate them through genetic counseling and screening will have an effect that will be more significant for individual families than for the species as a whole.
Contraceptive vaccines are in the offing, such as those based on the pregnancy hormone chorionic gonadotropin. 
G. Pran Talwar and his colleagues at the National Institute of Immunology in Delhi have demonstrated how remarkably effective this form of contraception can be, but only in women who make the right immune response.

Genetic information used appropriately may serve as an even more powerful tool.
The better we become at tracing the influence of destructive genetic factors, the better placed we shall be to thwart them.
Take rheumatoid arthritis as an example.
Studies with twins suggest that genetic factors contribute as much as one third to susceptibility to this disease and that the MHC is the strongest single genetic factor.
The situation in diabetes is similar.
We can begin to discern a susceptible "type." In the future, we shall be able to draw a much more complete profile of susceptibility, which will no doubt take account of the MHC and other genes as well as such other immunologic parameters as the pattern of cytokine production.
All this could be done for healthy individuals, so that they would know in what circumstances to expect their responses to fail or to go too far.

They could then take steps to avoid or prevent risk.

Has the immune system, then, reached its apogee after the few hundred million years it has taken to develop?
Can it respond in time to the new evolutionary challenges?
These perfectly proper questions lack sure answers because we are in an utterly unprecedented situation.
Even if we knew how often in the past host species had been wiped out by their parasites, that knowledge would tell us little about ourselves as we stand at present.
Yet there are grounds for optimism. 
Never before have we succeeded in eradicating a disease simply by enhancing the activity of the immune system, as was done with smallpox less than 20 years ago.
Never before has science been so sophisticated and so solidly lined up against infections, thanks to the World Health Organization (and more particularly its special research programs) and to such national organizations as the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. 

But above all, I put my trust in the powers of microevolution, in the capacity of polymorphism to pull new defenses out of its vast storeroom, and in the ability of host and parasite ultimately to adopt a common agenda.

Figure 1

CHALLENGE to the immune system is presented by the rapid growth of the human population, the crowding together of many individuals in large cities, such as London ( one of the city's commuter rail stations is shown here ), and the existence of high-speed, efficient means of travel. Such factors change our relationship to viruses, bacteria and parasites.

Figure 2

RAPID DIFFUSION OF DISEASE by air travel and other forms of transportation is a fact of contemporary life. Serious, sometimes lethal , infectious diseases such as various strains of influenza, AIDS and new, drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis spread rapidly around the world, often from developing to industrialized countries.

Figure 3

1 The process begins when a macrophage encounters an antigen.
2,3 The macrophage engages the antigen and engulfs it.
4 When the antigen has been ingested, the cell breaks it down and combines it with an MHC molecule.
The macrophage expresses the antigen-MHC combination on its outer membrane ( lower right ), where it can be detected by a T cell, which alerts B cells to make antibodies that mobilize either component of the immune system.

Figure 4

LEPROSY, a disease no longer endemic to Europe, shows a range of pathology that is the result of the immune system's ability to shut itself down when the danger exists that a response will damage the host. In the patient at the left, genes are expressed that have led to a lack of effective response.Consequently, the leprosy bacillus multiplies and collects in fluid-filled blebs on the skin. In the patient at the center, an effective immune response has caused no more than a lesion at the hairline. The hand at the right belongs to a patient in whom a vigorous immune response has been mounted but in whom not all the bacteria have been eliminated. In these intermediate cases, the immune response causes tissue damage.

Figure 5

a An inflammatory response begins when a molecular messenger exchanged between immune system cells, called tumor necrosis factor (TNF), locks onto its receptor.
b In order to block the inflammatory response, viruses lodged in cells that would be destroyed by the reaction cause the production of decoy receptors.
c The decoy receptor couples with TNF before the messenger can dock with an immune system cell.
This response has suggested a therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, a disease caused by inflammation, to workers at Immunex Corporation in Seattle.
The researchers are developing a TNF decoy that consists of two artificial receptors coupled to an antibody fragment.
They reason that the Y-shaped assembly will compete effectively for TNF molecules, thereby aborting the autoimmune inflammatory response.

Early results show success ( curves at right ). The artificial receptor sTNFR : Fc inhibits response in cultured cells at much lower concentrations than do other TNF receptors against which it was tested, perhaps as a result of cross-linking.

Figure 6

NEW TUBERCULOSIS STRAIN is highly virulent and resists drugs. Such altered forms of traditional pathogens as well as such new pathogens as the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV) and Legionella , which causes Legionnaires' disease, challenge and even undermine the human immune system.

Agendas: Shared and Unshared 

Richard Dawkins of the University of Oxford has noted that the relationship between pathogen and host can range from complete compatibility to fatal divergence, depending on the extent to which they share their agendas for survival.
When a pathogen's genome travels in the host's gametes, the two share a common agenda and thus "agree" that the host should be healthy and capable of reproduction.
The gametes of many mammal species, including the raccoon, carry a significant complement of such benign and even useful viral genes.
The relationship between the rabies virus and its host illustrates the opposite effect.
The virus, which spreads through contact with saliva, has little interest in host survival.
The historical trend in the relationships between humans and their pathogens, the author believes, has been toward the shared agenda.
