
Cell Division and Chromosomes

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Genetic continuity between cells and organism of any sexually reproducing species is maintained by the process of mitosis and meiosis.
These processes are orderly and efficient, serving to produce diploid somatic cells and haploid gametes and spores, respectively.
During these division stages, the genetic material is condensed into discrete, visible structures called chromosomes.
These structures take on various forms and appearances, and their study has provided important insights into the nature of the genetic material.

In every living thing there exists a substance referred to as the genetic material .
Except in certain viruses, this material is composed of the nucleic acid DNA.
A molecule of DNA contains many units called genes, the products of which direct all metabolic activities of cells.
DNA, with its array of genes, is organized into chromosomes , structures that serve as the vehicle for transmission of genetic information.
The manner in which chromosomes are transmitted from one generation of cells to the next, and from organisms to their descendants, is exceedingly precise.
In this chapter, we will consider just exactly how such transmission is accomplished as we pursue the topic of genetic continuity between cells and organisms.

Two major processes are involved in eukaryotes: mitosis and meiosis .
Although the mechanisms of the two processes are similar in many ways, the outcomes are quite different.
Mitosis leads to the production of two cells, each with the number of chromosomes identical to the parental cell.
Meiosis, on the other hand, reduces the amount of genetic material and the number of chromosomes by precisely half.
This reduction is essential if sexual reproduction is to occur without doubling the amount of genetic material at each generation.
Strictly speaking, mitosis is that portion of the cell cycle during which the hereditary components are precisely and equally divided into daughter cells. 
Meiosis is part of a special type of cell division leading to the production of sex cells: gametes and spores.
This process is an essential step in the transmission of genetic information from an organism to its of offspring.

Figure 0

Immunofluorescent micrograph of microtubules

In most cases, chromosomes are visible only when cells are actually dividing, that is, during mitosis or meiosis. 
When cells are not undergoing division, the genetic material making up chromosomes unfolds and uncoils into a diffuse network within the nucleus, generally referred to as chromatin .
In this chapter, we will examine this transition and also consider two specialized cases where chromosomes are extraordinarily large and amenable to investigation.
The study of these examples, polytene chromosomes and lampbrush chromosomes , has greatly extended our knowledge of genetic organization and its relationship to genetic function.

Cell Structure

Before describing mitosis and meiosis, we will briefly review the structure of cells.
As we shall see, many cellular components, such as the nucleolus, ribosome, and centriole, are involved directly or indirectly with genetic processes.
Other components, the mitochondria and chloroplasts, contain their own unique genetic information.
It is also useful for us to compare the structural differences of the bacterial prokaryotic cell with the eukaryotic cell.
Variation in structure and function of cells is dependent on the specific genetic expression by each cell type.

Before 1940, knowledge of cell structure was based on information obtained with the light microscope.
About 1940 the transmission electron microscope was in its early stages of development, and by 1950 many details of cell ultrastructure were unveiled.
Under the electron microscope, cells were seen as highly organized, precise structures.
A new world of whorling membranes, miniature organelles, microtubules, granules, and filaments was revealed.
These discoveries revolutionized thinking in the entire field of biology.
We will be concerned with those aspects of cell structure relating to genetic study.
Many of the parts of the cell are described in Figure 7.1, which depicts a typical animal cell.

Cell Boundaries

The cell is surrounded by a plasma membrane, an outer covering that defines the cell boundary T and delimits the cell from its immediate external environment.
This membrane is not passive; rather, it controls the movement of material such as gases, nutrients, and waste products into and out of the cell.
In addition to this membrane, plant cells have an outer covering called the cell wall.
One of the major components of this rigid structure is a polysaccharide called cellulose .
Bacterial cells also have a cell wall, but its chemical composition is quite different from that of the plant cell wall.
The major component in bacteria is a complex macromolecule called a peptidoglycan .
As its name suggests, the molecule consists of peptide and sugar units.
Long polysacchari de chains are cross-linked with short peptides, which impart great strength and rigidity to the bacterial cell. 
Some bacterial cells have still another covering, a capsule .
This mucus-like material protects these bacteria from phagocytic activity by the host during their pathogenic invasion of eukaryotic organisms.
As we will see in Chapter 10, the presence of the capsule is under genetic control.
Its loss due to mutation in the pneumonia-causing bacterium Diplococus pneumoniae provided the underlying basis for a critical experiment proving that DNA is the genetic material.

Activities at cell boundaries are dynamic physiological processes.
Both transport in and out of cells, and communication between cells, are critical to normal function.
Because physiological processes are biochemical in nature, we would expect that many genes and their products are essential to these activities. 
This is indeed the case, and as such, mutations in these genes can alter or interrupt normal physiological functions, often with severe consequences.
For example, the inherited disorder Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the result of complete loss of function of the product dystrophin, which is believed to function at the cell membrane of muscle cells.
As show in Figure 2.2, using immunofluorescent localization technology, dystrophin is completely absent from skeletal muscle of an afflicted individual compared to muscle from a control subject.

Many, if not most, animal cells have a covering over the plasma membrane called a cell coat .
Consisting of glycoproteins (sometimes called the glycocalyx ) and polysaccharides, the chemical composition of the cell coat differs from comparable structures in either plants or bacteria.
One function served by the cell coat is to provide biochemical identity at the surface of cells.
Among other forms of molecular recognition, various antigens are part of the cell coat.
All forms of biochemical identity at the cell surface are under genetic control, and many have been thoroughly investigated.
For example, the AB and MN antigens, which may elicit an immune response during blood transfusions, are found on the surface of red blood cells.
In other cells, the histocompatibility antigens , which elicit an immune response during tissue and organ transplants, are part of the cell coat.
Further, a variety of highly specific receptor molecules are integral components of the cell surface.
These constitute recognition sites that receive chemical signals that are often transferred to the cell.
Such signals may initiate a variety of chemical activities and may ultimately signal specific genes to turn on. 
We may conclude that the cell surface links its host cell to its outside world and is tied in numerous ways to genetic processes.

The Nucleus

The presence of the nucleus and other membranous organelles characterizes eukaryotic cells.
The nucleus houses the genetic material, DNA, which is found in association with large numbers of acidic and basic proteins. 
During nondivisional phases of the cell cycle this DNA/ protein complex exists in an uncoiled, dispersed state called chromatin .
As we will soon discuss, during mitosis and meiosis this material coils up and condenses into structures called chromosomes .
Also present in the nucleus is the nucleolus, an amorphous component where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized and where the initial stages of ribosomal assembly occur.
The areas of DNA encoding rRNA are collectively referred to as the nucleolar organizer region or the NOR.

Figure 2.1

Drawing of a generalized animal cell

Emphasis has been placed on the cellular components discussed in the text.

Figure 2.2

Localization of dystrophin in the sarcolemmal areas of normal muscle using immunoperoxidase staining

Complete lack of immunoreactive dystrophin in the skeletal muscle of a patient with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 

The lack of a nuclear envelope and membraneous organelles is characteristic of prokaryotes.
In bacteria such as E. Coli the genetic material is present as a long, circular DNA molecule that is compacted into an area referred to as the nucleoid region .
Part of the DNA may be attached to the cell membrane, but in general the nucleoid region constitutes a large area throughout the cell.
Although the DNA is compacted, it does not undergo the extensive coiling characteristic of the stages of mitosis where, in eukaryotes, chromosomes become visible.
Nor is the DNA in these organisms associated as extensively with proteins as is eukaryotic DNA.
Figure 2.3 shows the formation of two bacteria during cell division and illustrates the bacterial chromosomes in the nucleoid regions. 
Prokaryotic cells do not have a distinct nucleolus, but they do contain genes that specify rRNA molecules.

Figure 2.3

Color-enhanced electron micrograph of E. Coli undergoing cell division

Particularly prominent are the two chromosomal areas (show in red) that have been into the daughter cells.

The Cytoplasm and Organelles

The remainder of the eukaryotic cell enclosed by the plasma membrane, and excluding the nucleus, is composed of cytoplasm and all associated cellular organelles .
Cytoplasm consists of a nonparticulate, colloidal material referred to as the cytosol, which surrounds and encompasses the numerous types of cellular organelles.
Beyond these components? 
an extensive system of tubules and filaments comprising the eytoskeleton provides a lattice of support structures within the cytoplasm.
Consisting primarily of tubulin-derived microtubules and actin-derived microfilaments, this structural framework maintains cell shape, facilitates cell mobility, and anchors the various organelles.
Tubulin and actin are both proteins found abundantly in eukaryotic cells.

One organelle, the membranous endoplasmic reticulum (ER) , compartmentalizes the cytoplasm, greatly increasing the surface area available for biochemical synthesis. 
The ER may appear smooth, in which case it serves as the site for synthesis of fatty acids and phospholipids.
Or, the ER may appear rough because it is studded with ribosomes. 
Ribosomes, which we will later discuss in detail (see Chapter 12), serve as sites for the translation of genetic information contained in messenger RNA (mRNA) into proteins.

Three other cytoplasmic structures are very important in the eukaryotic cell's activities: mitochondria , chloroplasts , and centrioles .
Mitochondria are found in both animal and plant cells and are the sites of the oxidative phases of cell respiration .
These chemical reactions generate large amounts of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) , an energy-rich molecule.
The chloroplast is one type of plastid found in plants, algae, and some protozoans.
This organelle is associated with photosynthesis, the major energy-trapping process on earth.
Both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain a type of DNA distinct from that found in the nucleus.
Furthermore, these organelles can duplicate themselves and transcribe and translate their genetic information. 
It is interesting to note that the genetic machinery of mitochondria and chloroplasts closely resembles that of prokaryotic cells.
This and other observations have led to the proposal that these organelles were once primitive free-living organisms that established a symbiotic relationship with a primitive eukaryotic cell.
This proposal, which describes the evolutionary origin of these organelles, is called the endosymbiotic hypothesis .

Animal and some plant cells also contain a pair of complex structures called the centrioles .
These cytoplasmic bodies, found within a specialized region called the centrosome , are associated with the organization of those spindle fibers that function in mitosis and meiosis. 
In some organisms, the centriole is derived from another structure, the basal body , which is associated with the formation of cilia and flagella.
Over the years, many reports have suggested that centrioles and basal bodies contain DNA, which is involved in the replication of these structures. 
However, it is the current consensus that this is not the case.

The organization of spindle fibers by the centrioles occurs during the early phases of mitosis and meiosis.
Composed of arrays of microtubules, these fibers play an important role in the movement of chromosomes as they separate during cell division.
The microtubules consist of polymers of alpha and beta subunits of the protein tubulin. 
Interaction of the chromosomes and spindle fibers will be considered later in this chapter.

Homologous Chromosomes, Haploidy, and Diploidy

To discuss the processes of mitosis and meiosis, it is important to understand clearly the concept of homologous chromosomes .
Such an understanding will also be critical to our future discussions of Mendelian genetics. 
Thus, before embarking further, we will address this topic and introduce other important terminology.

Chromosomes are most easily visualized during mitosis. 
Then they are examined carefully, they are seen to table on distinctive lengths and shapes.
Each contains a condensed or constricted region called the centromere , which establishes the general appearance of each chromosome. 
Figure 2.4 illustrates chromosomes with centromere placements at different points along their lengths.
Extending from either side of the centromere are the arms of the chromosome. 
Depending on the position of the centromere, different arm ratios are produced.
As Figure 2.4 illustrates, chromosomes are classified as metacentric, submetacentric, acrocentric , or telocentric on the basis of the centromere location.
The shorter arm, by convention, is shown above the centromere and is called the p arm (p stands for "petite").
The longer arm is shown below the centromere and is called the q arm (q being the next letter in the alphabet). 

Figure 2.4

Centromere locations and designations of chromosomes based on their location

Note that the shape of the chromosome during anaphase is determined by the position of the centromere.

When studying mitosis, we may make several other important observations.
First, each somatic cell within members of the same species contains an identical number of chromosomes. 
This is called the diploid number (2n).
When the lengths and centromere placements of all such chromosomes are examined, a second general feature is apparent.
Nearly all of the chromosomes exist in pairs with regard to these two criteria.
The members of each pair are called homologous chromosomes .
For each chromosome exhibiting a specific length and centromere placement, another exists with identical features.
There are, of course, exceptions to the rule of chromosomes in pairs illustrated by organisms such as yeasts and molds that spend the predominant portion of their life cycle in the haploid stage.

Figure 2.5 illustrates the nearly identical physical appearance of members of homologous chromosome pairs.

There, the human mitotic chromosomes have been photographed (shown at the top of the figure), cut out of the print, and matched up, creating a karyotype (shown at the bottom of the figure).
As you can see, humans have a 2n number of 46 and exhibit a diversity of sizes and centromere placements. 
Note also that each one at the 46 chromosomes is clearly a double structure, consisting of two parallel sister chromatids connected by a common centromere.
Had these chromosomes been allowed to continue dividing, each pair of sister chromatids, which are replicas of one another, would have separated into two new cells as division continued. 

The haploid number (n) of chromosomes is one half of the diploid number.
Table 2.1 demonstrates the wide range of n values found in 32 diverse species of plants and animals.
Collectively, the total set of genes contained on one member of each homologous pair of chromosomes constitutes the haploid genome of the species.

Homologous pairs of chromosomes have important genetic similarity.
They contain identical gene sites along their lengths, each called a locus (pl. loci).
Thus, they have identical genetic potential.
In sexually reproducing organisms, one member of each pair is derived from the maternal parent (through the ovum) and one from the paternal parent (through the sperm).
Therefore, each diploid organism contains two copies of each gene as a consequence of biparental inheritance .
As we will see in the following chapters on transmission genetics, the members of each pair of genes, while influencing the same characteristic or trait, need not be identical.
Alternative forms of the same gene are called alleles .
In a population of members of the same species, many different alleles of the same gene may exist.

The concepts of haploid number, diploid number, and homologous chromosomes may be related to the process of meiosis.
During the formation of gametes or spores, meiosis converts the diploid number of chromosomes to the haploid number.
As a result, haploid gametes or spores contain precisely one member of each homologous pair of chromosomes, that is, one complete haploid set.
Following fusion of two gametes in fertilization, the diploid number is reestablished, that is, the zygote contains two complete haploid sets of chromosomes.
The constancy of genetic material is thus maintained from generation to generation. 

There is one important exception to the concept of homologous pairs of chromosomes.
In many species, one pair, the sex-determining chromosomes , is often not homologous in size, centromere placement, arm ratio, or genetic potential. 
For example, in humans, males contain a Y chromosome in addition to one X chromosome (Figure 2.5), whereas females carry two homologous X chromosomes.
The X and Y chromosomes are not strictly homologous.
The Y is considerably smaller and lacks most of the loci contained on the X.
Nevertheless, in meiosis they behave as homologs so that gametes produced by males receive either the X or Y chromosome.

Figure 2.5

A metaphase preparation of chromosomes derived from a human mole and the karyotype derived from it

All but the X and Y chromosomes are present in homologous pairs.
Each chromosome is actually a double structure, constituting a pair of sister chromatids joined at a common centromere.

Table 2.1

The Haploid Number of Chromosomes for Many Diverse Organisms

Common Name.
Scientific Name.
Common Name.
Scientific Name.


Black bread mold.
Broad bean.
Cat.
Cattle.
Chicken.
Chimpanzee.
Corn.
Cotton.
Dog.
Evening primrose.
Frog.
Fruit fly.
Garden onion.
Garden pea.
Grasshopper.
Green alga.
Horse.


Aspergillus nidulans.
Vicia faba.
Felis domesticus .
Bos taurus.
Gallus domesticus.
Pan troglodytes.
Zea mays.
Gossypium birsutum .
Canis familiaris.
Oenothera biennis.
Rana pipiens.
Drosophila melanogaster.
Allium cepa.
Pisum sativarn.
Melanoplus differentialis.
Chlamydomonas reinhardi.
Equus caballas.


House fly.
House mouse.
Human.
Jimson weed.
Mosquito.
Pink bread mold.
Potato.
Rhesus monkey.
Roumdworm.
Silkworm.
Slime mold.
Snapdragon.
Tobacco.
Tomato.
Water fly.
Wheat.
Yeast.


Musca domestica.
Mus musculus.
Homo sapiens.
Datura stramonium .
Culex pipiens.
Neurospora crassa.
Solanum tuberosum.
Macaca mulatta.
Carnorhabditis elegans.
Bombyx mori.
Dictyostelium discoidium .
Antirrbinum majus.
Nicotiana tabacum .
Nymphaea alba.
Triticum aestivum.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.


Mitosis and cell Division

The process of mitosis is critical to all eukaryotic organisms.
In many single-celled organisms, such as protozoans, some fungi, and algae, mitosis, as a part of cell division, provides the mechanism underlying their asexual reproduction.
Multicellular diploid organisms begin life as single-celled fertilized eggs or zygotes .
The mitotic activity of the zygote and the subsequent daughter cells is the foundation for development and growth of the organism.
In adult organisms, mitotic activity associated with cell division is prominent in wound healing and other forms of cell replacement in certain tissues.
For example, the epidermal skin cells of humans are continuously being sloughed off and replaced.
One estimate is that 100 billion cells are sloughed off daily by each human!
Cell division also results in a continuous production of reticulocytes, which eventually shed their nuclei and replenish the supply of red blood cells in vertebrates.
In abnormal situations, somatic cells may exhibit uncontrolled cell divisions, resulting in cancer. 

Usually following cell division, the initial size of new daughter cells is approximately one-half the size of their parent cell.
However, the nucleus of each new cell is not appreciably smaller than the nucleus of the original cell.
Quantitative measurements of DNA confirm that there are equivalent amounts of genetic material in the daughter nuclei as in the parent cell. 

The process of cytoplasmic division is called cytokinesis .
The division of cytoplasm requires a mechanism that results in a partitioning of the volume into two parts, followed by the enclosure of both new cells within a distinct plasma membrane.
Cytoplasmic organelles either replicate themselves, arise from existing membrane structures, or are synthesized de novo (anew) in each cell.
The subsequent proliferation of these structures is a reasonable and adequate mechanism for reconstituting the cytoplasm in daughter cells. 

Nuclear division ( karyokinesis ), where the genetic material is partitioned into daughter cells, is more complex than cytokinesis and requires more precision.
The chromosomes must first be exactly replicated and then accurately partitioned into daughter cells.
The end result is the production of two daughter cells, each with a chromosome composition identical to the parent cell.

Interphase and the Cell Cycle Many cells undergo a continuous alternation between division and nondivision. 
The interval between each mitotic division is called interphase .
It was once thought that the biochemical activity during interphase was devoted solely to the cell's growth and its normal function.
However, we now know that another biochemical step critical to the next mitosis occurs during interphase: the replication of the DNA of each chromosome .
Occurring as the cell prepares to enter nuclear division (mitosis), this period during which DNA is synthesized is called the S phase.
The initiation and completion of synthesis can be detected by monitoring the incorporation of radioactive DNA precursors such as 3H-thymidine. 
Their incorporation can be monitored using the technique of autoradiography (Appendix A).

Investigations of this nature have demonstrated two periods during interphase, before and after S, when no DNA synthesis occurs.
These are designated G1 (gap1) and G2 (gap2) , respectively.
During both of these periods, as well as during S phase, intensive metabolic activity, cell growth, and cell differentiation occur.
By the end of G2, the volume of the cell has roughly doubled, DNA has been replicated, and mitosis (M) is initiated.
Following mitosis, continuously dividing cells then repeat this cycle (G1, S. G2, M) over and over.
This concept of such a cell cycle is illustrated in Figure 2.6. 

Much is known about the cell cycle based on in vitro (test tube) studies.
When grown in culture, many cell types in different organisms traverse the complete cycle in about 16 hours.
The actual process of mitosis occupies only a small part of the cycle, usually about an hour.
The lengths of the S and G2 stages of interphase are fairly consistent among different cell types.
Most variation is seen in the length of time spent in the G1 stage.
Figure 2.7 illustrates the relative length of these periods in a typical cell.

The G1 period is of great interest in the study of cell proliferation and its control.
At a point late in G1, all cells follow one of two paths.
They either withdraw from the cycle and enter a resting phase in the G0 stage , or they become committed to initiate DNA synthesis and complete the cycle.
The time when this decision is made is called the G1 checkpoint .
This is one of three such restriction points, where under certain conditions, a cell may temporarily or permanently arrest.
We will return to this topic momentarily when we discuss cell cycle regulation.

Cells that enter G0 remain viable and metabolically active but are nonproliferative.
Cancer cells apparently avoid entering G0 or they pass through it very quickly.
Other cells enter G0 and never reenter the cell cycle.
Still others can remain quiescent in G0, but they may be stimulated to return to G1, reentering the cycle.

Mendelian Genetics

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Inherited characteristics are under the control of particulate factors called genes that are transmitted from generation to generation on vehicles called chromosomes, according to rules first described by Gregor Mendel.
Genetic ratios, expressed as probabilities, are subject to chance deviation and may be evaluated using statistical analysis.

Al though inheritance of biological traits has been recognized for thousands of years, the first significant insights into the mechanisms involved occurred less than a century and a half ago. 
In 1866, Gregor Mendel published the results of a series of experiments that would lay the foundation for the formal discipline of genetics.
In the ensuing years the concept of the gene as a distinct hereditary unit was established, and the ways in which genes are transmitted to offspring and control traits were clarified.
Research in these areas was accelerated in the first half of the twentieth century.
The resultant findings served as the foundation for the tremendous interest and research effort in genetics since about 1940.
It is safe to say that studies in genetics, most recently those at the molecular level, have remained continually at the forefront of biological research since the early 1900s.

In this chapter we focus on the development of the principles established by Mendel, now referred to as Mendelian or transmission genetics .
These principles describe how genes are transmitted from parents to offspring and were derived directly from Mendel's experimentation. 

When Mendel began his studies of inheritance using Pisum sativum , the garden pea, there was no knowledge of chromosomes nor of the role and mechanism of meiosis.
Nevertheless, he was able to determine that distinct units of inheritance exist and to predict their behavior during the formation of gametes.
Subsequent investigators, with access to cytological data, were able to relate their observations of chromosome behavior during meiosis to Mendel's principles of inheritance.
Once this correlation was made, Mendel's postulates were accepted as the basis for the study of transmission genetics.
Even today, they serve as the cornerstone of the study of inheritance.

Gregor Johann Mendel

In 1822, Johann Mendel was born to a peasant family in the European village of Heinzendorf, now part of the Czech Republic. 
An excellent student in high school, Mendel studied philosophy for several years afterward and was admitted to the Augustinian Monastery of St.
Tomas in Brno in 1843.
There, he took the name of Gregor and received support for his studies and research throughout the rest of his life.
In 1849, he was relieved of pastoral duties and received a teaching appointment that lasted several years.
From 1851 to 1853, he attended the University of Vienna, where he studied physics and botany. 
In 1854 he returned to Brno, where, for the next 16 years, he taught physics and natural science.

In 1856, Mendel performed his first set of hybridization experiments with the garden pea.
The research phase of his career lasted until 1868, when he was elected abbot of the monastery.
Although his interest in genetics remained, his new responsibilities demanded most of his time.
In 1884, Mendel died of a kidney disorder.
The local newspaper paid him the following tribute:
"His death deprives the poor of a benefactor, and mankind at large of a man of the noblest character, one who was a warm friend, a promoter of the natural sciences, and an exemplary priest".

Mendel's Experimental Approach

In 1865, Mendel first reported the results of some simple genetic crosses between certain strains of the garden pea. although, as we saw in Chapter 1, his was not the first attempt to provide experimental evidence pertaining to inheritance, Mendel's work is an elegant model of experimental design and analysis.

Mendel showed remarkable insight into the methodology necessary for good experimental biology.
He chose an organism that was easy to grow and to hybridize artificially.
The pea plant is self-fertilizing in nature, hut is easy to cross-breed experimentally.
It reproduces well and grows to maturity in a single season.
Mendel worked with seven unit characters, visible features that were each represented by two contrasting forms or traits.
For the character stem height, for example, he experimented with the traits tall and dwarf.
He selected six other contrasting pairs of traits involving seed shape and color, pod shape and color, and pod and flower arrangement.
True-breeding strains were available from local seed merchants. 
Each trait appeared unchanged generation after generation in self-fertilizing plants; that is, the strains exhibiting them "bred true." Mendel's success in an area where others had failed can be attributed to several factors in addition to the choice of a suitable organism.
He restricted his examination to one or very few pairs of contrasting traits in each experiment. 
He also kept accurate quantitative records, a necessity in genetic experiments.
From the analysis of his data, Mendel derived certain postulates that have become the principles of transmission genetics.

The results of Mendel's experiments went unappreciated until the turn of the century, well after his death.
Once Mendel's publications were rediscovered by geneticists investigating the function and behavior of chromosomes, the implications of his postulates were immediately apparent.
He had discovered the basis for the transmission of hereditary traits!

The Monohybrid Cross

The simplest crosses performed by Mendel involved only one pair of contrasting traits.
Each such breeding experiment involves a monohybrid cross .
A monohybrid cross is constructed by mating individuals from two parent strains, each of which exhibits one of the two contrasting forms of the character under study.
Initially we will examine the first generation of offspring of such a cross, and then we will consider the offspring of selfing or self-fertilizing individuals from this first generation.
The original parents are called the P1 or parental generation , their offspring are the F1 or first filial generation , and the individuals resulting from the selfing of the F1 generation are called the F2 or second filial generation .
We can, of course, continue to follow subsequent generations, if desirable.

The cross between true-breeding peas with tall stems and dwarf stems is representative of Mendel's monohybrid crosses. 
Tall and dwarf represent contrasting forms or traits of the character of stem height.
Unless tall or dwarf plants are crossed together or with another strain, they will undergo self-fertilization and breed true, producing their respective trait generation after generation.
However, when Mendel crossed tall plants with dwarf plants, the resulting F- generation consisted only of tall plants.
When members of the F1 generation were selfed, Mendel observed that 787 of 1064 F2 plants were tall, while 277 of 1064 were dwarf.
Note that in this cross (Figure 3.1) the dwarf trait disappears in the F1, only to reappear in the F2 generation.

Genetic data are usually expressed and analyzed as ratios. 
In this particular example, many identical P1 crosses were made and many F1 plants-all tall-were produced.
Of the 1064 F2 offspring, 787 were tall and 277 were dwarf-a ratio of approximately 2.8:1.0, or about 3:1.

Mendel made similar crosses between pea plants exhibiting each of the other pairs of contrasting traits.
Results of these crosses are also shown in Figure 3.1.
In every case, the outcome was similar to the tall/dwarf cross just described. 
All F1 offspring were identical to one of the parents. 
In the Fu an approximate ratio of 3:1 was obtained.
Three-fourths appeared like the F1 plants, while one-fourth exhibited the contrasting trait, which had disappeared in the F1 generation.

It is appropriate to point out one further aspect of the monohybrid crosses.
In each, the F1 and F2 patterns of inheritance were similar regardless of which P1 plant served as the source of pollen, or sperm, and which served as the source of the ovum, or egg.
The crosses could be made either way-that is, pollen from the tall plant pollinating dwarf plants, or vice versa.
These are called reciprocal crosses .
Therefore, the results of Mendel's monohybrid crosses were not sex-dependent.

To explain these results, Mendel proposed the existence of particulate unit factors for each trait.
He sugested that these factors serve as the basic units of heredity and are passed unchanged from generation to generation, determining various traits expressed by each individual plant.
Using these general ideas, Mendel proceeded to hypothesize precisely how such factors could account for the results of the monohybrid crosses.

Mendel's First Three Postulates 

Using the consistent pattern of results in the monohybrid crosses, Mendel derived the followining three postulates or principles of inheritance.

UNIT FACTORS IN PAIRS

Genetic characters are controlled by unit factors that exist in pairs in individual organisms.

In the monohybrid cross involving tall and dwarf stems, a specific unit factor exists for each trait.
Because the factors occur in pairs, three combinations are possible: 
two factors for tallness, two factors for dwarfness, or one of each factor.
Every individual contains one of these three combinations, which determines stem height.

DOMINANCE/RECESSIVENESS

When two unlike unit factors responsible for a single character are present in a single individual, one unit factor is dominant to the other, which is said to be recessive. 

In each monohybrid cross, the trait expressed in the F1 generation results from the presence of the dominant unit factor. 
The trait that is not expressed in the F1, but which reappears in the F2, is under the genetic influence of the recessive unit factor.
Note that this dominance/recessiveness relationship only pertains when unlike unit factors are present together in an individual.
The terms dominant and recessive are also used to designate the traits.
In the above case, the trait tall stem is said to be dominant to the recessive trait dwarf stem.

SEGREGATION

During the formation of gametes, the paired unit factors separate or segregate randomly so that each gamete receives one or the other with equal likelihood.
If an individual contains a pair of like unit factors (for example, both specify tall), then all gametes receive one tall unit factor.
If an individual contains unlike unit factors (e.g., one for tall and one for dwarf), then each gamete has a 50 percent probability of receiving either the tall or dwarf unit factor.

These postulates provide a suitable explanation for the results of the monohybrid crosses.
The tall/dwarf cross will be used to illustrate this explanation.
Mendel reasoned that P1 tall plants contained identical paired unit factors, as did the P1 dwarf plants.
The gametes of tall plants all received one tall unit factor as a result of segregation. 
Likewise, the gametes of dwarf plants all received one dwarf unit factor.
Following fertilization, all F1 plants received one unit factor from each parent, a tall factor from one and a dwarf factor from the other, reestablishing the paired relationship.
Because tall is dominant to dwarf, all F1 plants were tall.

When F1 plants form gametes, the postulate of segregation demands that each gamete randomly receive either the tall or dwarf unit factor.
Following random fertilization events during F1 selfing, four F2 combinations will result in equal frequency:

(1) tall/tall
(2) tall/dwarf
(3) dwarf/tall
(4) dwarf/dwarf

Combinations (1) and (4) will clearly result in tall and dwarf plants, respectively.
According to the postulate of dominance/recessiveness, combinations (2) and (3) will both yield tall plants.
Therefore, the F2 is predicted to consist of three-fourths tall and one-fourth dwarf, or a ratio of 3:1.
This is approximately what Mendel observed in the cross between tall and dwarf plants.
A similar pattern was observed in each of the other monohybrid crosses.

Modern Genetic Terminology

To illustrate the monohybrid cross and Mendel's first three postulates, w e must introduce several new terms as well as a set of symbols for the unit factors.
Traits such as tall or dwarf are visible expressions of the in formation contained in unit factors.
The physical appearance of a trait is called the phenotype of the individual.

All unit factors represent units of inheritance called genes by modern geneticists.
For any given character, such as plant height, the phenotype is determined by the presence of different combinations of alternative forms of a single gene called alleles.
For example, the unit factors representing tall and dwarf are alleles determining the height of the pea plant.

Depending on the organism being studied, there are many conventions used in assigning gene symbols.
In Chapter 4 we will review some of these, but for now we will adopt an approach that we can use consistently through the next few chapters. 
By one convention, the first letter of the recessive trait may be chosen to symbolize the character in question.
The lowercase letter designates the allele for the recessive trait, and the uppercase letter designates the allele for the dominant trait.
Therefore, we let d stand for the dwarf allele and D represent the tall allele.
When alleles are written in pairs to represent the two unit factors present in any individual (DD, Dd, or dd), these symbols are referred to as the genotype.
This term reflects the genetic makeup of an individual whether it is haploid or diploid.
By reading the genotype, it is possible to know the phenotype of the individual:
DD and Dd are tall, and dd is dwarf.
When identical alleles exist (DD or dd), the individual is said to be homozygous or a homozygote; when alleles are different (Dd), we use the term heterozygous or heterozygote.
These symbols and terms are used in Figure 3.2 to illustrate the complete monohybrid cross.

Mendel's Analytical Approach

What led Mendel to deduce unit factors in pairs Because there were two contrasting traits for each character, it seemed logical that two distinct factors must exist.
However, why does one of the two traits or phenotypes disappear in the F1 generation?
Observation of the F. generation helps to answer this question.
The recessive trait and its unit factor do not actually disappear in the F1;
they are merely hidden or masked, only to reappear in one-fourth of the F. offspring. 
Therefore, Mendel concluded that one unit factor for tall and one for dwarf were transmitted to each F1 individual; but because the tall factor or allele is dominant to the dwarf factor or allele, all F1 plants are tall.
Finally, how is the 3:1 F2 ratio explained?
As show in Figure 3.2, if the tall and dwarf alleles of the F1 heterozygote segregate randomly into gametes, and if fertilization is random, this ratio is the natural outcome of the cross.
Because he operated without the hindsight that modem geneticists enjoy, Mendel's analytical reasoning must be considered a truly outstanding scientific achievement. 
On the basis of rather simple, but precisely executed breeding experiments, he proposed that discrete particulate units of heredity exist, and he explained how they are transmitted from one generation to the next.

Punnett Squares

The genotypes and phenotypes resulting from the recombination of gametes during fertilization can be easily visualized by constructing a Punnett square, so named after the person who first devised this approach, Reginald C. Punnett.
Figure 3.3 illustrates this method of analysis for the F1 x F1 monohybrid cross.
Each of the possible gametes is assigned to an individual column or a row, with the vertical column representing those of the female parent and the horizontal row those of the male parent. 
After entering the gametes in rows and columns, the new generation is predicted by combining the male and female gametic information for each combination and entering the resulting genotypes in the boxes.
This process represents all possible random fertilization events.
The genotypes and phenotypes of all potential offspring are ascertained by reading the entries in the boxes.

The Punnett square method is particularly useful then one is first learning about genetics and how to solve problems.
In Figure 3.3, note the ease with which the 3:1 phenotypic ratio and the 1:2:1 genotypic ratio may be derived in the F2 generation. 

The Test Cross: One Character

Tall plants produced in the F2 generation are predicted to he of either the DD or Dd genotypes.
We might ask if there is a way to distinguish the genotype.
Mendel devised a rather simple method that is still used today in breeding procedures of plants and animals:
the test cross.

The organism of the dominant phenotype but unknown genotype is crossed to a homozygous recessive individual .
For example, as shown in Figure 3.4(a), if a tall plant of genotype DD is test-crossed to a dwarf plant, which must have the dd genotype, all offspring will be tall phenotypically and Dd genotypically.
However, as shown in Figure 3.4(b), if a tall plant is Dd and is crossed to a dwarf plant (dd), then one-half of the offspring will be tall (Dd) and the other half will be dwarf (dd).
Therefore, a 1:1 tall/dwarf ratio demonstrates the heterozygous nature of the tall plant of unknown genotype.
The results of test crosses reinforced Mendel's conclusion that separate unit factors control the tall and dwarf traits.

The Dihybrid Cross

A natural extension of performing monohybrid crosses was for Mendel to design experiments where two characters were examined simultaneously.
Such a cross, involving two pairs of contrasting traits, is a dihybrid cross.
It is also called a two-factor cross.
For example, if pea plants having yellow seeds that are also round were bred with those having green seeds that are also wrinkled, the results shown in Figure 3.5 will occur. 
The F1 offspring are all yellow and round.
It is therefore apparent that yellow is dominant to green, and that round is dominant to wrinkled.
In this dihybrid cross, the F1 individuals are selfed, and approximately 9/16 of the F2 plants express yellow and round, 3/16 express yellow and wrinkled, 3/16 express green and round, and 1/16 express green and wrinkled. A variation of this cross is also shown in Figure 3.5.
Instead of crossing one P1 parent with both dominant traits (yellow, round) to one with both recessive traits (green, wrinkled), plants with yellow, wrinkled seeds are crossed to those with green, round seeds.
Despite the change in the P1 phenotypes, both the F1 and F2 results remain unchanged.
It will become clear in the next section why this is so.

Figure 3.0

Mendel">s varden, as seen in the 1980s

Figure 3.1

A summary of the seven pairs of contrasting traits and the results of Mendel's seven monohybrid crosses

In each case, pollen derived from plants exhibiting one contrasting trait was used to fertilize the ova of plants exhibiting the other contrasting trait.
In the F generation one of the two traits, referred to as dominant, was exhibited by all plants.
The contrasting trait, referred to as recessive, then fourth of the F1 plants.
The garden pea (Pisum sativum) is shown in the photograph.

Figure 3.2

An explanation of the monohybrid cross between tail and dwarf pea plants

The symbols D and d are used to designate the tall and dwarf unit factors, respectively, in the genotypes of mature plants and gametes.
All individuals are shown in rectangles.
All gametes are shown in circles.

Figure 3.3

The use of a Punnett square in generating the F2 ratio of the F1 x F1 cross shown in Figure 3.2

Figure 3.4

The test cross illustrated with a single character

In (a), the tall parent is homozygous.
In (b), the tall parent is heterozygous.
The genotypes of each tall parent may be determined by examining the offspring when each is crossed to the homozygous recessive dwarf plant. 

Linkage, Crossing Over, and Chromosome Mapping

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Chromosomes contain many genes.
Unless separated by crossing over, alleles present at the many, loci on each homolog segregate as units during gamete formation.
Recombinant gametes resulting from crossing over enhance genetic variability within a species and serve as the basis for constructing chromosomal maps.

As early as 1903, Walter Sutton, who along with Theodor Boveri united the fields of cytology and genetics, pointed out the likelihood that in organisms there are many more "unit factors" than chromosomes.
Soon thereafter, genetic investigations with several organisms revealed that certain genes were not transmitted according to the law of independent assortment.
When studied together in matings, these genes seemed to segregate as if they were somehow joined or linked together.
Further investigations showed that such genes were part of the same chromosome, and they were indeed transmitted as a single unit.

We now know that most chromosomes consist of very large numbers of genes and, in fact, contain sufficient DNA to encode thousands of these units.
Genes that are part of the same chromosome are said to be linked and to demonstrate linkage in genetic crosses.

Because the chromosome, not the gene, is the unit of transmission during meiosis, linked genes are not free to undergo independent assortment.
Instead, the alleles at all loci of one chromosome should, in theory, be transmitted as a unit during gamete formation. 
However, in many instances this does not occur.
During the first meiotic prophase, when homologs are paired (or synapsed), a reciprocal exchange of chromosome segments may take place.
This event, called crossing over, results in the reshuffling or recombination of the alleles between homologs. 

The degree of crossing over between any two loci on a single chromosome is proportionate to the distance between them.
Thus, the percentage of recombinant gametes varies, depending on which loci are being considered.
This correlation serves as the basis for the construction of chromosome maps, which provide the relative locations of genes on the chromosomes.

Crossing over is currently viewed as an actual physical breaking and rejoining process that occurs during meiosis.
This exchange of chromosome segments provides an enormous potential for genetic variation in the gametes formed by any individual. 
This type of variation, in combination with that resulting from independent assortment, ensures that all offspring will contain a diverse mixture of maternal and paternal alleles.

In this chapter, we will discuss linkage, crossing over, and chromosome mapping.
We will also consider a variety of topics involving the exchange of genetic information.
We will conclude the chapter by entertaining the rather intriguing question of why Mendel, who studied seven genes, did not encounter linkage.
Or did he?

Linkage versus Independent Assortment 

To provide a simplified overview of the major theme of this chapter, Figure 5.1 illustrates and contrasts the meiotic consequences of independent assortment, linkage without crossing over, and linkage with crossing over.
Two homologous pairs of chromosomes are considered in the case of independent assortment and one homologous pair in the two cases of linkage.

Figure 5.1 (a) illustrates the results of independent assortment of two pairs of nonhomologous chromosomes, each containing one heterozygous gene pair.
No linkage is exhibited by the two genes.
When a large number of meiotic events are observed, four genetically different gametes are formed in equal proportions. 

We can compare these results with those that occur if the same genes are instead linked on the same chromosome.
If no crossing over occurs between the two genes [Figure 5.1 (b)], only two genetically different gametes are formed.
Each gamete receives the alleles present on one homolog or the other, which has been transmitted intact as the result of segregation. 
This case illustrates complete linkage, which results in the production of only parental or noncrossover gametes.
The two parental gametes are formed in equal proportions.
While complete linkage between two genes seldomly occurs, consideration of the theoretical consequences of this concept is useful when studying crossing over.

Figure 5.1(c) illustrates the results when crossing over occurs between two linked genes.
As you will note, this crossover involves only two nonsister chromatids of the four chromatids present in the tetrad.
This exchange generates two new allele combinations, called recombinant or crossover gametes.
The two chromatids not involved in the exchange result in noncrossover gametes, as, those in Figure 5.1(b).

The frequency with which crossing over occurs between any two linked genes is generally proportional to the distance separating the respective loci along the chromosome.
In theory, two randomly selected genes can be so close to each other that crossover events are too infrequent to be easily detected.
This circumstance, complete linkage, results in the production of only parental gametes, as shown in Figure 5.1(b).
On the other hand, if a distinct but small distance separates two genes, few recombinant and many parental gametes will be formed.
As the distance between the two genes increases, the proportion of recombinant gametes increases and that of the parental gametes decreases.
As a result, as in Figure 5.1(c), the proportion of crossover gametes varies depending on the distance between the genes studied.

As will be explored again later in this chapter, when two linked genes whose loci are far apart are considered, the number of recombinant gametes approaches, but does not exceed, 50 percent. 
If 50 percent recombinants occurred, a 1:1:1:1 ratio of the four types (two parental and two recombinant gametes) would result.
In such a case, transmission of two linked genes would be indistinguishable from that of two unlinked, independently assorting genes.
That is, the proportion of the four possible genotypes would be identical, as shown in Figure 5.1 (a, c). 

The Linkage Ratio

If complete linkage exists between two genes because of their close proximity, and organisms heterozygous at both loci are mated, a unique F2 phenotypic ratio results, which we shall designate the linkage ratio.
To illustrate this ratio, we will consider a cross involving the closely linked recessive mutant genes brown (bw) eye and heavy (hv) wing vein in Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 5.2).
The normal, wild-type alleles bw+ and hv+ are both dominant and result in red eyes and thin wing veins, respectively.

In this cross, flies with mutant brown eyes and normal thin veins are mated to flies with normal red eyes and mutant heavy veins.
We can describe these flies in more concise terms by just referring to their mutant phenotypes and say that brown-eyed flies are crossed with heavy-veined flies.
If we extend the system of using genetic symbols established in Chapter 4, linked genes may be represented by placing their allele designations above and below a single or double horizontal line.
Those placed above the line are located at loci on one homolog and those placed below at the homologous loci on the other homolog.
Thus, we may represent the P1 generation as follows: brown, thin and red, heavy.

Because the genes are located on an autosome, and not the X chromosome, no distinction for male and female is necessary. 

In the F1 generation each fly receives one chromosome of each pair from each parent; all flies are heterozygous for both gene pairs and exhibit the dominant traits of red eyes and thin veins: red, thin.

As shown in Figure 5.2, because of complete linkage, when the F1 generation is interbred, each F1 individual forms only parental gametes.
Following fertilization, the F2 generation will be produced in a 1:2:1 phenotypic and genotypic ratio.
One-fourth of this generation will show brown eyes and thin veins; one-half will show both wild-type traits, namely red eyes and thin veins; and one-fourth will show red eyes and heavy veins.
In more concise terms, the ratio is 1 brown:2 wild:1 heavy.
Such a ratio is characteristic of complete linkage, which is observed only when two genes are very close together and the number of progeny is relatively small.

Figure 5.2 also demonstrates the results of a test cross with the F1 flies.
Such a cross produces a 1:1 ratio of brown, thin and red, heavy flies.
Had the genes controlling these traits been incompletely linked or located on separate autosomes, four phenotypes rather than two would have been produced. 

When large numbers of mutant genes present in any given species are investigated, genes located on the same chromosome will show evidence of linkage to one another.
As a result, linkage groups can be established, one for each chromosome.
In theory, the number of linkage groups should correspond to the haploid number of chromosomes.
In organisms where large numbers of mutant genes are available for gene tic study, this correlation has been upheld.

Incomplete Linkage, Crossing Over, and Chromosome Mapping

If two genes linked on the same chromosome are selected randomly, it is highly improbable that they will be so close to one another along the chromosome that they demonstrate complete linkage.
Instead, crosses involving two randomly selected linked genes will almost always produce a percentage offspring resulting from recombinant gametes.
This percentage is variable and depends upon the distance between the two genes along the chromosome.
This phenomenon was first explained by two drosophila geneticists, Thomas H. Morgan anti his undergraduate student, Alfred H. Sturtevant.

Morgan and Crossing Over

As you may recall from our earlier discussion in chapter 4, Morgan first discovered the phenomenon of X-linkage.
In his studies, he investigated numerous Drosophila mutations located on the X chromosome.
When he analyzed crosses involving only one trait, he was able to deduce the mode of X-linked inheritance.
However, when he made crosses that simultaneously involved two X-linked genes, his results were at first puzzling. 
For example, as show in Cross A of Figure 5.3, he crossed mutant yellow body (y) and white eyed (w) females with wild-type males (gray body and red eyes).
The F1 females were wild type, whereas the F1 males expressed both mutant traits.
In the F2, 98.7 percent of the offspring showed the parental phenotype - yellow -bodied, white -eyed flies and wild-type flies (gray bodied, red-eyed).
The remaining 1.3 percent of the flies were either yellow -bodied with red eyes or gray-bodied with white eyes.
It was as if the genes had somehow separated from each other during gamete formation in the F1 flies.

When Morgan made crosses involving other X-linked genes the results were even more puzzling (Cross B of figure 5.3). 
The same basic pattern was observed, but the proportion of F2 phenotypes differed; for example, in a cross involving white -eye, miniature -wing mutants, only 62.8 percent of the F2 showed the parental phenotypes. while 37.2 percent of the offspring appeared as if the mutant genes had been separated during gamete formation.

In 1911, Morgan was faced with two questions:
(1) What was the source of gene separation?
and (2) What did the frequency of the apparent separation vary depending on the genes being studied?
The proposed answer to the first question was based on his knowledge of earlier cytological observations made by F. Janssens and others.
Janssens had observed that synapsed homologous chromosomes in meiosis wrapped around each other, creating chiasmata [sing., chiasma] where points of overlap are evident.
Morgan proposed that these chiasmata could represent points of genetic exchange.

In the crosses shown in Figure 5.3, Morgan postulated that if an exchange occurred between the mutant genes on the two X chromosomes of the F1 females, it would lead to the observed results.
He suggested that such exchanges led to 1.3 percent recombinant gametes in the yellow - white cross and 37.2 percent in the white - miniature cross.
On the basis of this and other experimentation, Morgan concluded that linked genes exist in a linear order along the chromosome and that a variable amount of exchange occurs between any two genes.

As an answer to the second question, Morgan proposed that two genes located relatively close to each other along a chromosome are less likely to have a chiasma form between them than if the two genes are farther apart on the chromosome.
Therefore, the closer two genes are, the less likely it is that a genetic exchange will occur between them.
Morgan proposed the term crossing over to describe the physical exchange leading to recombination.

Sturtevant and Mapping

Morgan's student, Alfred H. Sturtevant, was the first to realize that his mentor's proposal could also be used to map the sequence of linked genes.
According to Sturtevant, "In a conversation with Morgan ...
I suddenly realized that the variations in strength of linkage, already attributed by Morgan to differences in the spatial separation of the genes, offered the possibility of determining sequences in the linear dimension of a chromosome.
I went home and spent most of the night (to the neglect of my undergraduate homework) in producing the first chromosomal map...." For example, Sturtevant compiled data on recombination between the genes represented by the yellow , white and miniature mutants initially studied by Morgan.
Frequencies of crossing over between each pair of these three genes were observed to be:

(1) yellow , white 0,5%
(2) white , miniature 34,5%
(3) yellow , miniature 35,4%

Because the sum of (1) and (2) is approximately equal to (3), Sturtevant argued that the recombination frequencies between linked genes are additive.
On this basis, he predicted that the order of the genes on the X chromosome was yellow - white - miniature .
In arriving at this conclusion, he reasoned as follows:
The yellow and white genes are apparently close to each other because the recombination frequency is low.
However, both of these genes are quite far apart from miniature because the white , miniature and yellow , miniature combinations show large recombination frequencies.
Because miniature shows more recombination with yellow than with white (35,4 vs. 34,5), it follows that white is between the other two genes, not outside of them.

Sturtevant knew from Morgan's work that the frequency of exchange could be taken as an estimate of the relative distance between two genes or loci along the chromosome.
He constructed a map of the three genes on the X chromosome, with one map unit being equated with 1 percent recombination between two genes. [1] 
In the preceding example, the distance between yellow and white would be 0.5 map unit, and between yellow , and miniature , 35.4 map units.
It follows that the distance between white and miniature should be (35.4 - 0.5) or 34.9. 
This estimate is close to the actual frequency of recombination between white and miniature (34.5).
The simple map for these three genes is shown in Figure 5.4.

In addition to these three genes, Sturtevant considered two other genes on the X chromosome and produced a more extensive map including all five genes.
He and a colleague, Calvin Bridges, soon began a search for autosomal linkage in Drosophila. 
By 1923, they had clearly shown that linkage and crossing over were not restricted to X-linked genes.
Rather, they had discovered linked genes on autosomes, between which crossing over occurred.

During this work, they made another interesting observation. 
In Drosophila, crossing over was shown to occur only in females.
The fact that no crossing over occurs in males made genetic mapping much less complex to analyze in Drosophila. 
However, crossing over does occur in both sexes in most other organisms.

Although many refinements in chromosome mapping have developed since Sturtevant's initial work, his basic principles are accepted as correct.
They have been used to produce detailed chromosome maps of organisms for which large numbers of linked mutant genes are known.
In addition to providing the basis for chromosome mapping, Sturtevant's findings were historically significant to the field of genetics.
In 1910, the chromosomal theory of inheritance was still being widely disputed.
Even Morgan was skeptical of this theory prior to the time he conducted the bulk of his experimentation.
Research has now firmly established that chromosomes contain genes in a linear order and that these genes are the equivalent of Mendel's unit factors.

Single Crossovers

Why should the relative distance between two loci influence the amount of recombination and crossing over observed between them?
The basis for this variation is explained in the following analysis.

During meiosis, a limited number of crossover events occur in each tetrad.
These recombinant events occur randomly along the length of the tetrad.
Therefore, the closer that two loci reside along the axis of the chromosome, the less likely it is that any single crossover event will occur between them.
The same reasoning suggests that the farther apart two linked loci are, the more likely it is that a random crossover event will occur between them.

In Figure 5.5(a), a single crossover occurs between two nonsister chromatids, but not between the two loci; therefore, the crossover goes undetected because no recombinant gametes are produced.
In Figure 5.5(b), where two loci are quite far apart, the crossover occurs between them, yielding recombinant gametes.

When a single crossover occurs between two nonsister chromatids, the other two strands of the tetrad will not be involved in this exchange and may enter a gamete unchanged.
Under these conditions, even if a single crossover occurs 100 percent of the time between two linked genes, recombination will subsequently be observed in only 50 percent of the potential gametes formed. 
This concept is diagrammed in Figure 5.6.

Multiple Crossovers

It is possible that in a single tetrad, two, three, or more exchanges will occur between nonsister chromatids as a result of several crossing over events.
Double exchanges of genetic material result from double crossovers, as shown in Figure 5.7. 
For a double exchange to be studied, three gene pairs must be investigated, each heterozygous for two alleles.
Before we can determine the frequency of recombination among all three loci, we must review some simple probability calculations. 

The probabilities of a single exchange occurring between the A and B or the B and C genes are directly related to the physical distance between each locus.
The closer A is to B and B is to C, the less likely it is that a single exchange will occur between either of the two sets of loci.
In the case of a double crossover, two separate and independent events or exchanges must occur simultaneously.
The mathematical probability of two independent events occurring simultaneously is equal to the product of the individual probabilities.
This is the product law previously introduced in Chapter 3. 

Suppose that crossover gametes resulting from single exchanges between A and B are recovered 20 percent of the time (p = 0.20) and between B and C 30 percent of the time (p = 0.30).
The probability of recovering a double-crossover gamete arising from two exchanges, between A and B and between B and C, is predicted to be (0.20) (0.30) = 0.06, or 6 percent.
It is apparent from this calculation that the frequency of double-crossover gametes is always expected to be much lower than that of either single-crossover class of gametes.

If three genes are relatively close together along one chromosome, the expected frequency of double-crossover gametes is extremely low.
For example, consider the A-B distance in Figure 5.7 to be 3 map units and the B-C distance in that figure to be 2 map units.
The expected double-crossover frequency would be (0.03) (0.02) = 0.0006, or 0.06 percent.
This translates to only 6 events in 10,000.
In a mapping experiment such as just described, one involving closely linked genes, very large numbers of offspring are required to detect double-crossover events.
In this example, it would be unlikely that a double crossover would be observed even if 1000 offspring were examined.
If these portability considerations are extended, it is evident that if four or five genes were being mapped, even fewer triple and quadruple crossovers could be expected to occur.

Three-Point Mapping in Drosophila 

The information presented in the previous section serves the basis for mapping three or more linked genes in single cross. 
To illustrate this, we will examine a situation involving three linked genes.

Three criteria must be met for a successful mapping cross: 
1. The genotype of the organism producing the crossover gametes must be heterozygous at all loci under consideration. 
If homozygosity occurred at any locus, all gametes produced would contain the same allele, precluding mapping analysis.

2. The cross must be constructed so that genotypes of all gametes can be accurately determined by observing the phenotypes of the resulting offspring.
This is necessary because the gametes and their genotypes can never be observed directly.
Thus, each phenotypic class must reflect the genotype of the gametes of the parents producing it.

3. A sufficient number of offspring must be produced in the mapping experiment to recover representative sample of all crossover classes.

These criteria are met in the three-point mapping cross from Drosophila melanogaster shown in Figure 5.8.
In this cross, three X-linked recessive mutant genes - yellow body color, white eye color, and echinus eye shape -are considered.
To diagram the cross, we must assume some theoretical sequence, even though we do not yet know if it is correct.
In Figure 5.8, we will initially assume the sequence of the three genes to be y-w-ec.
If this is incorrect, our analysis will reveal the correct sequence.

In the P1 generation, males hemizygous for all thee wild-type alleles are crossed to females that are homozygous for all three recessive mutant alleles.
Therefore, the P1 males are wild type with respect to body color, eye color, and eye shape. 
They are said to have a wild-type.

Figure 5.0

Chiasmata present between synapsed homologs during the first meiotic prophase

Figure 5.1

A comparison of the results of gamete formation where two heterozygous genes are (a) on two different pairs of chromosomes; (b) on the same pair of homologs, but with no exchange occurring between them; and (c) on the same pair of homologs, with an exchange between two nonsister chromatids

Figure 5.2

Results of a cross involving two genes located on the same chromosome, demonstrating complete linkage

Part (a) generates the F2 results of the cross; Part (b) generates the results of a test cross involving the F1 progeny.

Figure 5.3

The Fl and F2 results of crosses involving the yellow -body white -eye mutations and the white -eye, miniature -wing mutations

In the F2 generation of Cross A, 1.3 percent of the flies demonstrate recombinant phenotypes, which express either white or yellow .
In the F2 generation of Cross B, 37.2 percent of the flies demonstrate recombinant phenotypes, which express either miniature or white .

Figure 5.4

A simple map of the yellow (y), white (w), and miniature (m) genes on the X chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster 

Each number represents the percentage of recombinant offspring produced in the three crosses, each involving two different genes.

Figure 5.5

Two cases of exchange between two nonsister chromatids and the gametes subsequently produced 

In Part (a) the exchange does not separate the alleles of the two genes, only parental gametes are formed, and the exchange goes undetected.
In Part (b) the exchange separates the alleles, resulting in recombinant gametes, which are detectable.

Figure 5.6

The consequences of a single exchange between two nonsister chromatids occurring in the tetrad stage

Two noncrossover (parental) and two crossover (recombinant) gametes are produced.

Figure 5.7

Results of a double exchange occurring between nonsister chromatids

Because the exchanges involve only two strands, two noncrossover gametes and two double-crossover gametes are produced.
The photograph illustrates chiasmara found in a tetrad isolated during the first meiotic prophase stage.

[1] In honor of Morgan's work, one map unit is often referred to as a centimorgan (cM). 

Recombination and Mapping in Bacterial and Bacteriophages

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Bacteria and bacteriophages (viruses that have bacteria as their hosts) have been the subject of extensive genetic analysis.
They demonstrate several mechanisms by which genetic recombination occurs, processes that may be utilized to perform genetic mapping.
Bacteria often contain extrachromosomal DNA in the form of plasmids.
Both plamlids and bacteriophage DNA may be involved in recombination and can be integrated into the bacterial chromosome.
An extensive analysis of gene structure in bacteriophage T4 established the basis for genetic complementation and complementation testing, an assay that remains important in modern-day investigations.

In this chapter we shift from the consideration of transmission of genetic information in eukaryotes to a discussion of various genetic phenomena in bacteria (prokaryotes) and bacteriophages, viruses that have bacteria as their host.
The study of bacteria and bacteriophages has been essential to the accumulation of knowledge in many areas of genetic study.
For example, much of what is known about molecular genetics, recombinational phenomena, and gene structure has been initially derived from experimental work with these organisms.
Furthermore, as we shall see in Chapters 15 and 16, our abundant knowledge of bacteria and their resident plasmids has served as the basis for their widespread use in DNA cloning during recombinant DNA studies.

Their successful use in genetic investigations is due to numerous factors.
Both bacteria and their viruses have extremely short reproductive cycles.
Literally hundreds of generations, giving rise to billions of genetically identical bacteria or phages, can be produced in short periods of time. 
Furthermore, they can be studied in pure cultures.
That is, a single species or mutant strain of bacteria or one type of virus can be isolated and investigated independently of other similar organisms.

Our major emphasis in this chapter will be on genetic recombination that occurs in both bacteria and bacteriophages.
Detailed processes have evolved that facilitate genetic recombination within populations of these microorganisms and viruses.
As we will see, these processes serve as the basis for performing chromosome mapping analysis.
Such studies established the initial foundation of knowledge concerning the genetic identity of bacteria and bacteriophages that served as the cornerstone of subsequent molecular genetic investigations.

Bacterial Mutation and Growth

Genetic studies using bacteria depend upon our ability to isolate mutations in these organisms.
Although it was known well before 1943 that pure cultures of bacteria could give rise to small numbers of cells exhibiting heritable variation, particularly with respect to survival under different environmental conditions, the source of the variation was hotly debated.
The majority of bacteriologists believed that environmental factors induced changes in certain bacteria that led to their survival or adaptation to the new conditions.
For example, strains of E. coli are known to be sensitive to infection by the bacteriophage T1.
Infection by the bacteriophage leads to the reproduction of the virus at the expense of the bacterial cell, which is lysed or destroyed.
If a plate of E. coli is homogeneously sprayed with T1, almost all cells are lysed. 
Rare E. coli cells, however, survive infection and are not lysed.
If these cells are isolated and established in pure culture, all descendants are resistant to T1 infection. 
It can be argued that the mutations responsible for T1 resistance were "induced" by the presence of the T1 viruses, and that, in the absence of the T1 viruses, the mutations would not have occurred.
However, as we will explore in a subsequent chapter, such T1-resistant cells result from spontaneous mutation, which was elegantly proved by Salvador Luria and Max Delbruck in 1943 (see Chapter 14).

Bacterial cells that bear spontaneous mutations, such as T1 resistance, can be isolated and established independently from the parent strain by using various selection techniques. 
As a result, mutations for almost any desired characteristic can now be induced and isolated.
Because bacteria and viruses that infect them are haploid, all mutations are expressed directly in the descendants of mutant cells, adding to the ease with which these microorganisms can be studied.

Bacteria are grown in either a liquid culture medium or in a Petri dish on a semisolid agar surface.
If the nutrient components of the growth medium are very simple and consist only of an organic carbon source (such as a glucose or lactose) and a 3 variety of ions, including Na+, K+, Mg++, Ca++, and NH3+ present as inorganic salts, it is called minimal medium.
To grow on such a medium, a bacterium must be able to synthesize all essential organic compounds (e.g., amino acids, purines, pyrimidines, sugars, vitamins fatty acids).
A bacterium that can accomplish this remarkable biosynthetic feat -one that we ourselves cannot duplicated- is termed a prototroph.
It is said to be wild type for all growth requirements.
On the other hand, if a bacterium loses through mutation, the ability to synthesize one or more organic components, it is said to be an auxotroph.
For example, if it loses the ability to make histidine, then this amino acid must be added as a supplement to the minimal medium in order for growth to occur.
The resulting bacterium is designated as a his- auxotroph, as opposed to its prototrophic his+ counterpart.
Note that medium which has been extensively supplemented is referred to as complete medium.

To study mutant bacteria in a quantitative fashion, an inoculum of bacteria is placed in liquid culture medium.
A characteristic growth pattern is exhibited, as illustrated in Figure 6.1.
Initially, during the lag phase, growth is slow.
Then, a period of rapid growth ensues called the log phase.
During this phase, cells divide many times with a fixed time interval between cell divisions, resulting in logarithmic growth.
When a cell density of about l0 cells per milliliter is reached, nutrients and oxygen become limiting and cells enter the stationary phase.
As the doubling time during the log phase may be as short as 20 minutes, an initial inoculum of a few thousand cells can easily achieve a maximum cell density in an overnight culture.

Cells grown in liquid medium can he quantitated by transferring them to semisolid medium in Petri dish.
Following incubation and many divisions, each cell gives rise to a visible colony on the surface of the medium.
The number of colonies allows one to calculate the number of bacteria present in the original culture.
If the number of colonies is too great to count, then serial dilutions of the original liquid culture can be made and plated, until the colony number is reduced to the point where it can be counted (Figure 6.2).
Such calculations are useful in a variety of studies.

For example, in the three plates shown in the photograph in Figure 6.2, let us assume that a liquid culture of bacteria has been sampled.
An initial milliliter (ml) is withdrawn, and it is our desire to determine how many cells are present per milliliter.
If the initial milliliter is subjected to a series of serial dilutions, this can be accomplished easily. 

Assume that the three Petri dishes in Figure 6.2 represent dilutions of 10-3, 10-4, and 10-5, respectively (left to right). 
We need to select only the dish where the number of colonies can be accurately counted.
Because each colony presumably arose from a single bacterium, that number times the dilution factor represents the number of bacteria in the initial milliliter. 
In our case, the dish farthest to the right contains > colonies.
Since it represents a dilution of 10-5, the initial number of bacterium is estimated to be 15 x 10-5 per milliliter.

Genetic Recombination in Bacteria 

Conjugation

Development of techniques that allowed the identification and study of bacterial mutations led to detailed investigations of the arrangement of genes on the bacterial chromosome.
In 1946, Josbua Lederberg and Edward Tatum initiated these studies. 
They showed that bacteria undergo conjugation, a parasexual process in which the genetic information from one bacterium is transferred to and recombined with that of another bacterium. 
Like meiotic crossing over in eukaryotes, genetic recombination in bacteria provided the basis for the development of methodology for chromosome mapping.
Note that the term genetic recombination, as applied to bacteria and bacteriophages, leads to the replacement of one or more genes present in one strain with those from a genetically distinct strain.
While this is somewhat different from our use of genetic recombination in eukaryotes, where the term describes crossing over that results in reciprocal exchange events, the overall effect is the same:
Genetic information is transferred from one organism to another, resulting in an altered genotype.
Two other phenomena, transformation and transduction, also result in the transfer of genetic information from one bacterium to another and have also served as a basis for determining the arrangement of genes on the bacterial chromosome. 
We will return to a discussion of these processes in ensuing sections of this chapter.

Lederberg and Tatum's initial experiments were performed with two multiple auxotroph strains (nutritional mutants) of E. coli Kl2.
Strain A required methionine (met) and biotin (bio) in order to grow, whereas strain B required threonine (thr), leucine (leu), and thiamine (thi), as shown in Figure 6.3.
Neither strain would grow on minimal medium.
The two strains were first grown separately in supplemented media, and then cells from both were mixed and grown together for several more generations.
They were then plated on minimal medium. 
Any bacterial cells that grew on minimal medium would be prototrophs (wild-type bacteria).
It was highly improbable that any of the cells that contained two or three mutant genes would undergo spontaneous mutation simultaneously at two or three locations.
Therefore, any prototropils recovered must have arisen as a result of some form of genetic exchange and recombination.

In this experiment, prototrophs were recovered at a rate of 1/107 (10-7) cells plated.
The controls for this experiment involved separate plating of cells from strains A and B on minimal medium.
No prototrophs were recovered.
Based on these observations, Lederberg and Tatum proposed that genetic recombination had occurred!

F+ and F- Bacteria

There soon followed numerous experiments designed to elucidate the genetic basis of conjugation.
It became quickly evident that different strains of bacteria were involved in a unidirectional transfer of genetic material.
Cells of one strain could serve as donors of parts of their chromosomes and are designated as F+ cells (F for "fertility").
Recipient bacteria, which undergo genetic recombination by receiving donor chromosome material, now known to be DNA, and recombining it with part of their own, are designated as F-cells.

It was established subsequently that cell contact is essential to chromosome transfer.
Support for this concept was provided by Bernard Davis, who designed a U-tube in which to grow F+ and F-cells (Figure 6.4).
At the base of the tube was a sintered glass filter with a pore size that allowed passage of the liquid medium, but was too small to allow the passage of bacteria.
The F+ cells were placed on one side and F- cells on the other side of the filter.
The medium was moved back and forth across the filter so that the bacterial cells essentially shared a common medium during incubation.
Samples from both sides of the tube were then plated independently on minimal medium, but no prototrophs were found.
Davis concluded that physical contact is essential to genetic recombination.
This physical interaction is the initial stage of the process of conjugation and is mediated through a structure called the F or sex pilus. 
Bacteria often have many pili, which are microscopic extensions of the cell.
Different types of pili perform different cellular functions, but all pili are involved in some way with adhesion.
After contact has been initiated between mating pairs via the F pili (Figure 6.5), transfer of DNA begins. 

Evidence was provided subsequently that F+ cells contained a fertility factor (called the F factor), conferring their ability to donate part of their chromosome during conjugation.
In experiments by Joshua and Esther Lederberg and by William Hayes and Luca Cavalli-Sforza, it was shown that certain conditions could eliminate the F factor in otherwise fertile cells.
However, if these "infertile" cells were then grown with fertile donor cells, the F factor was regained.

This conclusion that the F factor is a mobile element was further supported by the observation that, following conjugation and genetic recombination, recipient cells always become F+. 
Thus, in addition to the rare case of transfer of genes from the bacterial chromosome, the F factor itself is passed to all recipient cells.
On this basis, the initial crosses of Lederberg and Tatum (Figure 6.3) may be designated:

Confirmation of these conclusions is based on the isolation of the F factor.
Like the bacterial chromosome, but distinct from it, the F factor has been shown to consist of a circular, double-stranded DNA molecule.
It contains an amount of DNA equivalent to about 2 percent of that making up the bacterial chromosome (about 100,000 nucleotide pairs).
Contained in the F factor, among others, are 19 genes, the products of which are involved in the transfer of genetic information (tra genes), including those essential to the formation of the sex pilus.

As we soon shall see, the F factor is in reality an autonomous genetic unit referred to as a plasmid.
However, in our historical coverage of its discovery, we will continue to refer to it as a "factor".

It is believed that the transfer of the F factor during conjugation involves separation of two strands of the helical DNA making up the F factor and the movement of one of the two strands into the recipient.
The other remains in the donor cell.
Both of these parental strands serve as templates for DNA replication, resulting in two intact F factors, one in each of the two F+ cells.
This process is diagrammed in Figure 6.6.

To summarize, E. coli cells may or may not contain the F factor.
When it is present, the cell is able to form a sex pilus and potentially serve as a donor of genetic information. 
During conjugation, a copy of the F factor is almost always transferred from the F+ cell to the F- recipient, converting it to the F+ state.
The question remains as to exactly how a very low percentage of F-cells undergo genetic recombination. 
As we will discuss, the answer awaited further experimentation. 

Hfr Bacteria and Chromosome Mapping 

Subsequent discoveries not only clarified how genetic recombination occurs but also defined a mechanism by which the E. coli chromosome could be mapped.
We shall first address chromosome mapping. 

In 1950, Cavalli-Sforza treated an F+ strain of E. coli K12 with nitrogen mustard, a potent chemical known to induce mutations.
From these treated cells he recovered a strain of donor bacteria that underwent recombination at a rate of 1/10 (10-4), 1000 times more frequently than the original F+ strains. 
In 1953, William Hayes isolated another strain demonstrating a similar elevated frequency.
Both strains u ere designated Hfr, or high-frequency recombination.
Because Hfr cells behave as chromosome donors, they are a special class of F+ cells. 

Another important difference u as noted between Hfr strains and the original F+ strains.
If the donor is an Hfr strain, recipient cells, while sometimes displaying genetic recombination, never become Hfr; that is, they remain F-.

Perhaps the most significant characteristic of Hfr strains is the nature of recombination.
In any given strain, certain genes are more frequently recombined than others, and some not at all.
This nonrandom pattern of gene transfer was shown to vary from Hfr strain to Hfr strain.
While these results were puzzling, Hayes interpreted them to mean that some physiological alteration of the F factor had occurred, resulting in the production of Hfr strains of E coli.

In the mid-1950s, experimentation by Ellie Wollman and Franois Jacob explained the differences between cells that are Hfr compared to those that are F+ and showed how Hfr strains allow genetic mapping of the E. coli chromosome.
In their experiments, Hfr and F-strains with suitable marker genes were mixed and recombination of specific genes assayed at different times.
To accomplish this, a culture containing a mixture of an Hfr and an F-strain was first incubated and samples removed at various intervals and placed in a blender. 
The shear forces created in the blender separated conjugating bacteria so that the transfer of the chromosome was effectively terminated.
The cells u ere then assayed for genetic recombination. 
To facilitate the recovery of only recombinants, the Hfr strain was sensitive to an antibiotic while the recipient strain was resistant.
Following the blender treatment, the cells were grown on medium containing the antibiotic in order to initially ensure the recovery of only recipient cells.

This process, called the interrupted mating technique, demonstrated that specific genes of a given Hfr strain were transferred and recombined sooner than others.
Figure 6.7 illustrates this point.
During the first 8 minutes after the two strains were initially mixed, no genetic recombination could be detected. 
At about 10 minutes, recombination of the aziR gene could be detected, but no transfer of the tonS, lac+, or gal+ genes was noted.
By 15 minutes, 70 percent of the recombinants were aziR; 30 percent were now also tonS; but none was lac+ or gal+.
Within 20 minutes, the lac+ gene was found among the recombinants; and within 30 minutes, gal + was also being transferred.
Therefore, Wollman and Jacob had demonstrated an oriented transfer of genes that was correlated with the length of time conjugation was allowed to proceed.

It appeared that the chromosome of the Hfr bacterium was transferred linearly and that the gene order and distance between them, as measured in minutes, could be predicted from such experiments (Figure 6.8).
This information served as the basis for the first genetic map of the E. coli chromosome.
"Minutes" in bacterial mapping are equivalent to "map units" in eukaryotes. 

Wollman and Jacob then repeated the same type of experimentation with other Hfr strains, obtaining similar results with one important difference.
Although genes were always transferred linearly with time, as in their original experiment, which genes entered first and which followed later seemed to vary from Hfr strain to Hfr strain [Figure 6.9(a)l.
When they reexamined the rate of entry of genes, and thus the different genetic maps for each strain, a definite pattern emerged.
The major differences between all strains were simply the point of the origin and the direction in which entry proceeded from that point [Figure 6.9(b)]. 

To explain these results, Wollman and Jacob postulated that the E. coli chromosome is circular.
If the point of origin (O) varied from strain to strain, a different sequence of genes would be transferred in each case.
But what determines O?
They proposed that in various Hfr strains, the F factor integrates into the chromosome at different points.
Its position determines the O site.
One such case of integration is shown in Figure 6.10.
During subsequent conjugation between this Hfr and an F-cell, the position of the F factor determines the initial point of transfer.
Those genes adjacent to O are transferred first.
The F factor becomes the last part to be transferred.
Apparently, conjugation rarely, if ever, lasts long enough to allow the entire chromosome to pass across the conjugation tube.
This proposal explains why recipient cells, when mated with Hfr cells, remain F-.

Figure 6.10 also depicts the way in which the two strands making up a DNA molecule unwind during transfer, allowing for the entry of one of the strands of DNA into the recipient.
Following replication of the entering DNA, it now has the potential to recombine with its homologous region of the host chromosome. 
The DNA strand that remains in the donor also undergoes replication.

The use of the interrupted mating technique with different Hfr strains has provided the basis for mapping the entire F. coli chromosome.
Mapped in time units, strain K12 (or E. coli K12) is 100 minutes long.
Over 900 genes have now been placed on the map.
In most instances, only a single copy of each gene exists.

Figure 6.0

Transmission electron micrograph of conjugating E. coli

Figure 6.1

A typical bacterial population growth curve illustrating the initial lag phase, the subsequent log phase, where exponential growth occurs, and the stationary phase that occurs when nutrients are exhausted

Figure 6.2

Results of the serial dilution technique and subsequent culture of bacteria

Each of the dilutions varies by a factor of 10. 
Each colony was derived from a single bacterial cell. 

Figure 6.3

Genetic recombination involving two auxotrophic strains producing prototrophs

Neither auxotroph will grow on minimal medium, but prototrophs will, allowing their recovery.

Figure 6.4

When strain A and B auxotrophs are grown in a common medium but are separated by a filter, no genetic recombination occurs and no prototrophs are produced 

This apparatus is called a Davis U-tube.

Figure 6.5

An electron micrograph of conjugation between an F+ E. coli cell and an F-cell

The sex pilus is clearly visible.

Figure 6.6

An F+ X F-mating demonstrating how the recipient F-cell is converted to F+

During conjugation, the DNA of the F factor is replicated with one new copy entering the recipient cell. converting it to F-.
The black bar has been added to the F factors to follow their rotation.

Figure 6.7

The progressive transfer during conjugation of various genes from a specific Hfr strain of E. coli to an F strain

Certain genes (azi and ton) are transferred sooner than others and recombine more frequently.
Others (lac and gal) take longer to be transferred and recombine with a lower frequency.
Others (thr and leu) are always transferred and are used in the initial screen for recombinants.

Figure 6.8

A time map of the genes studied in the experiment depicted in Figure 6.7

Figure 6.9

The order of gene transfer in four Hfr strains, suggesting that the E. coli chromosome is circular

The point where transfer originates (Origin) is identified in each strain.
Note that transfer can proceed in either direction, depending on the strain.
The origin is determined by the point of integration into the chromosome of the F factor, and the direction of transfer is determined by the orientation of the F factor as it integrates.

Figure 6.10

Conversion of F+ to an Hfr state occurs by the integration of the F factor into the bacterial chromosome

The point of integration determines the origin of transfer.
During conjugation, the F factor is nicked by an enzyme, creating the origin of transfer of the chromosome. 
The major portion of the F factor is now on the end of the chromosome adjacent to the origin and is the last part to be transferred.
Conjugation is usually interrupted prior to complete transfer.
Above, only the A and B genes are transferred.

Extensions of Genetic Analysis

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

This chapter addresses a number of topics representing extensions of the general subject of transmission genetics introduced in earlier chapters.
These topics are both analytical and somewhat more complex than those previously introduced.
They include a consideration of variation in phenotypic expression, the quantitative analysis of polygenic traits, heritability, and mapping analysis performed using haploid eukaryotes.
Expression of the phenotype is not always the direct reflection of the genotype and may be modified by many internal and external conditions.
The quantitative analysis of polygenic traits requires the use of biometric and statistical methodology.
Chromosome mapping in haploid organisms requires approaches different from those used in mapping diploid organisms, put adheres to the same general principles.

Thus far in the text, we have introduced a core of information that constitutes the general body of knowledge referred to as transmission genetics .
In this chapter we turn to several advanced topics that are more accessible now that you have gained the foundation provided in the first six chapters.
These constitute relevant extensions of our previous discussions and are highly analytical in nature.

We will begin by looking at the topic of phenotypic expression and reviewing factors that affect it.
As we shall see, expression of genetic information is not always as clear-cut as most of our previous examples might suggest.
An organism bearing a mutant genotype may exhibit considerable variation in the expression of the related phenotype. 
In some cases, a percentage of the mutant organism may fail to express the phenotype at all!
As We shall see, many factors may modify phenotypic expression.

Next we will extend our prior discussion of polygenic inheritance from Chapter 4 with a more thorough examination of quantitative inheritance .

As we do so, we shall consider several statistical approaches that are often used in analyzing quantitative traits and expressing variance in population data.
Then we will introduce the concept of heritability -the assessment of the extent to which genetic factors contribute to phenotypic variation within populations.
We will conclude this chapter by returning to the topics of linkage and crossing over and extending our discussion to include chromosome mapping in haploid organisms .
We will examine this topic in eukaryotic fungus Neurospora and the green alga Chlamydomonas. 

Phenotypic Expression

Gene expression is often discussed as though the genes operate in a closed, "black box" system in which the presence or absence of functional products directly determines the collective phenotype of an individual.
The situation is actually much more complex.
Most gene products function within the internal milieu of the cell; cells interact with one another in various ways, and the organism must survive under diverse environmental influences.
Gene expression and the resultant phenotype are often modified through the interaction between an individual's particular genotype and the internal and external environment.

The degree of environmental influence can vary from inconsequential to subtle to very strong.
Subtle interactions are the most difficult to detect and document, and they have led to unresolved "nature-nurture" conflicts in which scientists debate the relative importance of genes versus environment.
In this section we will deal with some of the variables known to modify gene expression.

Penetrance and Expressivity

Some mutant genotypes are always expressed as a distinct phenotype, whereas others produce a proportion of individuals whose phenotypes cannot be distinguished from normal (wild type). 
The degree of expression of a particular trait may be quantitatively studied by determining the penetrance and expressivity of the genotype under investigation.
The percentage of individuals that show at least some degree of expression of a mutant genotype defines the penetrance of the mutation.
For example, the phenotypic expression of many mutant alleles in Drosophila may overlap with wild type. 

Files homozygous for the recessive mutant gene eyeless yield phenotypes that range from the presence of normal eyes to a partial reduction in size to the complete absence of one or both eyes (Figure 7.1).
If 15 percent of mutant flies show the wild-type appearance, the mutant gene is said to have a penetrance 85 percent.

On the other hand, the range of expression defines the expressivity, of the mutant genotype.
In the case of eyeless , although the average reduction of eye size is one-fourth to one-half, the range of expressivity is from complete loss of both eyes to completely normal eyes (Figure, 7.1).

Examples such as the expression of the eyeless phenotype have provided the basis for experiments designed to determine the causes of phenotypic variation.
If the laboratory environment is held constant and extensive variation is still observed, the genetic background may be investigated. 
It is possible that other genes are influencing or modifying the eyeless phenotype.
On the other hand, if the genetic background is not the cause of the phenotypic variation, environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, and nutrition may be tested.
In the case of the eyeless phenotype, it has been determined experimentally that both genetic background and environmental factors influence its expression.

Genetic Background:

Suppression and Position Effects

With only certain exceptions, it is difficult to assess the specific effect of the genetic background and the expression of a gene responsible for determining the potential phenotype. 
TWO of the better characterized effects of genetic background are described below.

First, the expression of other genes throughout the genome may have an effect on the phenotype produced by the gene in question. 
The phenomenon of genetic suppression is an example. 
Mutant genes such as suppressor of sable (Su-S), Suppressor of forked (su-f), and suppressor of Hairy-wing (su-Hw) in Drosophila completely or partially restore the normal phenotype to an organism that is homozygous (or hemizygous) for sable, forked, and Hairy-wing, respectively. 
For example, flies hemizygous for both forked (a bristle mutation) and su-f have normal bristles.

The phenomenon of suppression occurs in a wide variety of organisms.
In microorganisms, where molecular studies are easier to perform, some suppressor genes encode molecules that function during the genetic translation process.
For example, there are mutations in transfer RNA (tRNA), genes that suppress the expression of mutations present in other genes. 
During translation, the altered tRNA misreads the mutant information present in mRNA, restoring wild-type function to the gene product.
The impact is suppression of the mutant phenotype.

It has also been hypothesized that a suppressor gene product might provide or activate an alternative metabolic route that bypasses a block in a biosynthetic pathway caused by the primary mutation.
Such situations have also been documented.
Suppressor genes are excellent examples of the genetic background modifying primary gene effects.

Second, the physical location of a gene in relation to other genetic material may influence its expression.
Such a situation is called a position effect.
For example, if a gene is included in a translocation or inversion event (in which a region of a chromosome is relocated or rearranged), the expression of the gene may be affected.
This is particulary true if the gene is relocated to or near certain areas of the chromosome that are genetically inert, referred to as heterochromatin. 

An example of such a position effect involves female Drosophila heterozygous for the X-linked recessive eve-color mutant white (w).
Prior to translocation, the w+/w genotype results in a wild-type brick-red eye color.
However, if the region of the X chromosome containing the wild-type w+ allele is translocated so that it is close to a heterochromatic region, expression of the w+ allele is modified (Figure 7.2). 
Therefore, following translocation, the dominant effect of the normal w+ allele is reduced.
Instead of having a red color, the eyes are variegated, or mottled with red and white patches.
A similar position effect is produced if a heterochromatic region is relocated next to the white locus on the X chromosome.
Apparently, heterochromatic regions inhibit the expression of adjacent genes.
Loci in many other organisms also exhibit position effects, providing proof that alteration of the normal arrangement of genetic information can modify its expression.

Temperature Effects

Because chemical activity depends on the kinetic energy of the reacting substances, which in turn depends on the surrounding temperature, we can expect temperature to ' influence phenotypes. 
For example, the evening primrose produces red flowers when grown at 23C and white flowers when grown at 18C.

Siamese cats and Himalayan rabbits exhibit dark fur in regions of the nose, ears, and paws because the body temperatures of these extremities are slightly cooler (Figure 7.3).
In these cases, it appears that the enzyme responsible for pigment production is functional at the lower temperatures present in the extremities, but it loses its catalytic function at the slightly higher temperatures found throughout the rest of the body.

Mutations that are affected by temperature are said to be conditional and are called temperature sensitive.
Examples are known in a variety of organisms, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and Drosophila .
In extreme cases, an organism carrying a mutant allele may express a mutant phenotype when grown at one temperature, but express the wild-type phenotype when reared at another temperature.
This type of temperature effect is useful in studying mutations that interrupt essential processes during reproduction and development and are thus normally detrimental to the organism.
For example, bacterial viruses carrying certain temperature-sensitive mutations are allowed to infect bacteria cultured at 42C; infection progresses until the essential gene product is needed and then arrests; this temperature is referred to as the restrictive condition.
If cultured under permissive conditions of 25C, the gene product is functional, infection proceeds normally, and new viruses are produced.
The use of temperature-sensitive mutations, which may be induced and isolated, has added immensely to the study of viral genetics. 

Similarly, many temperature-sensitive mutations have been discovered in Drosophila that affect development, morphology, and behavior.

Most are recessive lethals and have proven to be invaluable in the genetic dissection of these processes.

Nutritional Effects

Another example of conditional mutations involves nutrition. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, in microorganisms, mutations that prevent synthesis of nutrient molecules are quite common. 
These nutritional mutants arise when an enzyme essential to a biosynthetic pathway becomes inactive.
In microorganisms, an organism bearing such a mutation is called an auxotroph.
If the end product of a biochemical pathway can no longer be synthesized, and if that molecule is essential to normal growth and development, the mutation prevents growth and may be lethal. 
If, for example, the bread mold Neurospora can no longer synthesize the amino acid leucine, proteins cannot be synthesized unless leucine is added to the growth medium.
If leucine is added, the detrimental effect is overcome.

Nutritional mutants have been crucial to molecular genetic studies and also served as the basis for George Beadle and Edward Tatum's proposal, in the early 1940s, that one gene functions to produce one enzyme.

In humans, a slightly different set of circumstances is known.
The presence or absence of certain dietary substances, which normal individuals may consume, without harm, can adversely affect individuals with abnormal genetic constitutions.
Often, a mutation may prevent an individual from metabolizing some substance commonly found in normal diets.
For example, those afflicted with the genetic disorder phenylketonuria cannot metabolize the amino acid phenylalanine.
Those with galactosemia cannot metabolize galactose.
Other individuals are intolerant of the milk sugar lactose and are said to exhibit lactose intolerance. 
Those with diabetes cannot adequately metabolize glucose. 

In this case, excessive amounts of the molecule accumulate in the body and become toxic, and a characteristic phenotype results.
However, if the dietary intake of the molecule is drastically reduced or eliminated, the associated phenotype may be reversed.

The case of lactose intolerance illustrates the general principles involved.

Lactose is a disaccharide consisting, of a molecule of glucose and a molecule of galactose.
It is present as, percent of human milk and 4 percent of cow's milk.

To metabolize lactose, humans require the enzyme lactase, which cleaves the disaccharide.
Adequate amounts of lactase are produced during the first few years after birth.
However, in many racial and ethnic groups, the levels of this enzyme soon drop drastically, and adults become intolerant of milk.
The major phenotypic effect involves severe intestinal diarrhea, flatulence, and abdominal cramps.
This condition, while not limited to, is particularly prevalent in Eskimos, Africans, Asiatics, and Americans with these heritages.
In these cultures, milk is usually converted to other foods, including cheese, butter, and yogurt.
In these forms, the amount of lactose is reduced significantly and adverse effects can be nearly eliminated.
In the United States, milk low in lactose is commercially available, and to aid in the digestion of other lactose-containing foods, lactase is now a commercial product that can be ingested.

Onset of Genetic Expression

Not all genetic traits are expressed at the same time during an organism's life span.
In most cases, the age at which a gene is expressed corresponds to the normal sequence of growth and development.
In humans, the prenatal, infant, preadult, and adult phases require different kinds of genetic information. 
In a similar way, many genetic disorders can be expected to manifest themselves at different stages of life.
Lethal genes account for many of the frequent spontaneous abortions and miscarriages occurring in the human population.
These mutations are believed to alter genetic products essential to prenatal development.

In humans, many severe inherited disorders are often not manifested until after birth.
For example, Tay-Sachs disease, inherited as an autosomal recessive, is a lethal lipid metabolism disease involving an abnormal enzyme, hexosaminidase A.
However, newborns appear normal for the first five months.
Then, progressive deterioration occurs, and the affected children die before age four.

The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, inherited as an X-linked recessive, causes abnormal nucleic acid metabolism (biochemical salvage of nitrogenous purine bases), leading to the accumulation of uric acid in blood and tissues, mental retardation, palsy, and self-mutilation of the lips and fingers.
The disorder is due to a mutation in the gene encoding hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT) .
Newborns are normal for six to eight months prior to the onset of the first symptoms. 
Still another example involves Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), an X-linked recessive disorder associated with progressive muscular wasting.
It is usually diagnosed between the ages of three and five years.
Even with modern medical intervention, the disease is often fatal in the early twenties. 

Perhaps the most variable of all inherited human disorders regarding age of onset is the tragic Huntington disease.
Inherited as an autosomal dominant, Huntington disease affects the frontal lobes of the cerebral cortex where progressive cell death occurs over a period of more than a decade.
Brain deterioration is accompanied by spastic uncontrolled movements, intellectual and emotional deterioration, and ultimately death. 
While onset has been reported at all ages, it most frequently occurs between ages 30 and 50, with a mean onset of 38 years. 
Most often, early onset is associated with an affected male parent, although such a response is not universal to off-spring of males with the disorder.

Observations such as these support the concept that the critical expression of normal genes varies throughout the life cycle of organisms, including humans.

Gene products may play more essential roles at certain times.
Also, it would appear that the internal physiological environment of an organism changes with age.

Genetic Anticipation

Considerable insights have been gained concerning the onset of genetic expression by studying cases where clear-cut patterns of initial expression have been observed.
The phenomenon of genetic anticipation refers to the occurrence of a genetic disorder with a progressively earlier age of onset in successive generations.
As we will see, earlier onset is correlated with an increased severity of the disorder.

At least three human disorders clearly demonstrate genetic anticipation:
myotonic dystrophy (DM), fragile-X mental retardation, and spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease) .
We will focus on the information derived from studies of DM to discuss genetic anticipation.

Myotonic dystrophy, the most common type of adult muscular dystrophy, is an autosomal dominant disorder of variable severity and age of onset.
Mildly affected individuals develop cataracts as adults with little or no muscular weakness.
Severely affected individuals demonstrate more severe myopathy and may be mentally retarded.
In its most extreme form, the disease is fatal just after birth.
Careful investigation during the past half-century has revealed that the increased severity is correlated with earlier onset, linking the disease with genetic anticipation.

A great deal of excitement has been generated recently among geneticists as a result of more recent studies involving myotonic dystrophy.
In 1989, C. J. Howeler and colleagues reported on their study of 61 parent-child pairs.
In 60 of 61 cases, age of onset was earlier in the child!
By 1992, several research teams had discovered a possible molecular basis for this case of genetic anticipation.
Located on chromosome 19 (19q1.3 contains the DM locus) is an unstable DNA sequence characterized by a specific trinucleotide (CTG) that is repeated a variable number of times.
The remarkable finding is the correlation between the size of the trinucleotide repeat and both the severity and onset of the disorder.
In successive generations the size of the repeated segment increases. 
STormal individuals average about five copies; minimally affected individuals reveal about 50 copies, while severely affected individuals demonstrate over 1000 copies!

Although it is not yet clear how an expansion of the size of this gene-associated region affects onset and phenotypic expression, the correlation is extremely strong.
Of great interest is that both fragile-X syndrome and Kennedy disease also reveal an association between a gene-associated DNA amplification and disease severity.
More recently, a similar finding has been made in the gene encoding Huntington disease.
We will return to this general topic in Chapter 14.

For now, we can only anxiously await further information linking the molecular defect to the phenomenon of genetic anticipation. 

Genomic (Parental) Imprinting

One of the major exceptions to the assumptions underlying the laws of Mendelian inheritance involves the case where genetic expression varies, depending on the parental origin of the chromosome carrying a particular gene.
The phenomenon is called genomic (or parental) imprinting.
It appears that, in some species, certain regions of chromosomes and the genes contained within them somehow retain a memory, or an "imprint," of their parental origin that influences their genetic expression.
As a result, specific genes either are expressed or remain genetically silent, are not expressed, based on their imprint.

For example, in Huntington disease in humans, as pointed out above, early onset of the disease most often occurs when the mutant gene is inherited from the father.
In myotonic dystrophy, just the opposite is true.
In this disorder, when early onset is obsenTed, the affected off-spring usually inherits the gene from the mother.

The imprinting step is thought to occur before or during gamete formation, leading to differentially marked genes (or chromosome regions) in sperm-forming versus egg-forming tissues. 
The process is clearly different from mutation because in the cases cited above, the imprint can be reversed in succeeding generations as these autosomal genes pass from mother to son to granddaughter, and so on.

Another example of imprinting involves the inactivation of one of the X chromosomes in mammalian females.
As we will discuss in Chapter 9, a mechanism of dosage compensation exists whereby the random inactivation of either the paternal or maternal X chromosome occurs during embryonic development. 
However, in mice, prior to the development of the embryo proper, imprinting occurs in tissues such that the X chromosome of paternal origin is genetically inactivated in all cells while the genes on the maternal X chromosome remains genetically active. 
As embryonic development is subsequently initiated, the imprint is "released" and random inactivation of either the paternal or the maternal X chromosome can occur.

In 1991, more specific information became available when it was established that three specific mouse genes undergo imprinting. 
One of them is the gene encoding insulinlike growth factor II ( Igf2 ).
A mouse that carries two nonmutant alleles of this gene is normal in size, whereas a mouse that carries two mutant alleles lacks a growth factor and is a dwarf. 
The size of a heterozygous mouse (one allele normal and one mutant - Figure 7.4) depends on the parental origin of the normal allele.
The mouse is normal in size if the normal allele came from the father, but dwarf if the normal allele came from the mother.
From this it can be deduced that the normal I7 gene is imprinted to function poorly during the course of egg production in females but functions normally when it has passed through sperm-producing tissue in males.

Imprinting continues to depend on whether the gene passes through sperm-producing or egg-forming tissue leading to the next generation.
For example, a heterozygous normal-sized male (above) will donate a "normal-functioning" wild-type allele to half his offspring that will counteract a mutant allele received from the mother.

In humans, two distinct genetic disorders are thought to be caused by differential imprinting of the same region of chromosome 15 (15q1).
In both cases, the disorders appear to be due to an identical deletion of this region in one member of the chromosome 1 S pair.
The first disorder, Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), results when only an undeleted maternal chromosome remains.
If only an undeleted paternal chromosome remains, an entirely different disorder, Angelman syndrome (AS), results. 

Prader-Willi syndrome is clearly different from AS.
In the former, mental retardation is noted as well as a severe eating-disorder marked by an uncontrollable appetite, obesity, and diabetes.
On the other hand, AS leads to distinct clinical manifestations involving behavior as well as mental retardation.
One can conclude that region 15q1 is imprinted differently in male versus female gametes and that both a maternal and paternal region are required for normal development.

The area genomic imprinting has received a great deal of recent research attention; many questions remain unanswered. 
It is not known how many genes are subject to imprinting, nor its developmental role.
While it appears that regions of chromosomes rather than specific genes are imprinted, the molecular mechanism of imprinting is still a matter for conjecture. 
It has been hypothesized that DNA methylation may be involved.
In vertebrates, methyl groups can be added to the carbon atom at position 5 in cytosine as a result of the activity of the enzyme DNA methyl transferase.
Methyl groups are added when the dinucleotide CpG or grups of CpG units (called CpG islands) are present along a DNA chain.
DNA methylation is a reasonable mechanism for establishing a molecular imprint, since there is some evidence that a high level of methylation can inhibit gene activity and that active genes (or their regulatory sequences) are often undermethylated.
Additionally, variation in methylation has been noted in the mouse genes that undergo imprinting.
Whatever the cause of this phenomenon, it is a fascinating topic and one that will receive significant attention in future research studies.

Figure 7.0

Ascospores contained in the asci of the bread mold Neurospora crassa

Figure 7.1

Gradations in phenotype, ranging from wild type to eyeless , associated with the eyeless mutation in Drosophila 

Figure 7.2

Eye phenotype in two female Drosophila heterozygous for the gene white

Normal dominant phenotype showing brick-red eye color. (b) Variegated color of an eye caused by rearrangement of the white gene to another location in the genome.

Figure 7.3

A Himalayan rabbit (b) A Siamese cat

Both show dark fur color at the extremities of the ears, nose, and paws.
These patches are due to expression of a temperature-sensitive allele responsible for pigment production at the lower temperatures of the extremities.

Figure 7.4

The effect of imprinting on the Igf2 gene in the mouse, which produces dwarf mice in the homozygous condition

Heterozygous offspring that receive the normal allele from their father are normal in size.
Heterozygotes that receive the normal allele from their mother, which has been imprinted (i), are dwarf.

Chromosome Variation and Sex Determination

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Genetic information of a diploid organism is delicately balanced in both content and location within the genome.
As a result of studying variation in the sex chromosomes, valuable insights have been gained into the mode of sex determination in many organisms.
Other studies have revealed that a change in chromosome number or in the arrangement of a chromosome region often results in phenotypic variation or disruption of development of an organism.
Because the chromosome is the unit of transmission in meiosis, such variations are passed to offspring in a predictable manner, resulting in many informative genetic situations.

Up to this point in the text, we have emphasized how mutations and the resulting alleles affect an organism's phenotype, and how traits are passed from parents to offspring according to Mendelian principles.
In this chapter, we shall look at phenotypic variation occurring as a result of changes in the genetic material that are more substantial than alterations of individual genes.
These involve modifications at the level of the chromosome.

Although most members of diploid species normally contain precisely two haploid chromosome sets, many cases are known in which some variation from this pattern occurs.
Modifications include variations in the number of individual chromosomes as well as rearrangements of the genetic material either within or among chromosomes.
Taken together, such changes are called chromosome mutations or chromosome aberrations, to distinguish such genetic alterations from gene mutations.
Because the chromosome is the unit transmitted according to Mendelian laws, chromosome aberrations are transmitted to offspring in a predictable manner, resulting in many interesting examples of heritable phenotypic variation.

In this chapter, we shall consider the many types of chromosomal aberrations, the consequences of them for organisms, and what we can learn from these situations.
We will also discuss their role in the evolutionary process.
We will see that the genetic component of a diploid organism is delicately balanced in content and location within the genome.
Even minor alterations of content or location may result in some form of phenotypic variation, while more substantial changes may be lethal, particularly in animals.

We begin this chapter with the analysis of sex chromosome variation in humans and Drosophila.
These studies have led to an understanding of how sex is determined in these organisms. 
We shall also pursue several other topics related to the genetic function of sex chromosomes.

Variation in Chromosome Number: 

An Overview

Before embarking on a discussion of variations involving the number of chromosomes in organisms and sex determination, it is useful to establish the terminology used that describes such changes.
Variation in chromosome number ranges from the addition or loss of one or more chromosomes to the addition of one or more haploid sets of chromosomes.
When an organism gains or loses one or more chromosomes, but not a complete set, the condition of aneuploidy is created.
The loss of a single chromosome creates a condition called monosomy.
The gain of one chromosome to an otherwise diploid genome results in trisomy.
These are contrasted with the condition of euploidy, where complete haploid sets of chromosomes are present. 
If there are three or more sets, the more general term polyploidy is applicable.
Those with three sets are specifically triploid; those with four sets are tetraploid, and so on.
Table 9.1 provides a useful organizational framework for you to follow as we discuss each of these categories and the subsets within them.

The Diploid Chromosome Number in humans

From the time when dividing cells of humans were first observed, geneticists tried to accurately determine the chromosome number of our own species.
The first significant attempt was made in 1912, when H. von Winiwarter counted 47 chromosomes in a spermatogonial metaphase preparation.
At that time, geneticists believed that the sex-determining mechanism in humans was based on the presence of an extra chromosome in females; that is, females were thought to have 48 chromosomes.
In the 1920s, Theophilus Painter observed between 45 and 48 chromosomes in cells of testicular tissue and also discovered the small Y chromosome, which is now known to occur only in males. 
In his original paper, Painter favored 46 as the diploid number in humans, but he later concluded incorrectly that 48 was the chromosome number in both males and females.

Table 9.1

Terminology for Variation in Chromosome Numbers

Term.
Explanation.


Aneuploidy.
2n plus or minus chromosomes.


Monosomy.
2n - 1.


Trisomy.
2n + 1.


Tetrasomy, pentasomy, etc.
2n + 2, 2n + 3, etc.


Euploidy.
Multiples of n.


Diploidy.
2n.


Polyploidy.
3n, 4n, 5n,... .


Triploidy.
3n.


Tetraploidy, pentaploidy, etc.
4n, 5n, etc.


Autopolyploidy.
Multiples of the same genome.


Allopolyploidy (Amphidiploidy).
Multiples of different genomes.


For 30 years, this number was accepted.
Then, in 1956, Joe Hin Tjio and Albert Levan introduced improvements in chromosome preparation techniques. 
These improved techniques led to a strikingly clear demonstration of metaphase stages showing that 46 was indeed the human diploid number.
Later that same year, C. E. Ford and John L. Hamerton, also working with testicular tissue, confirmed this finding. 

Within the normal 23 pairs of human chromosomes, one pair was shown to vary in configuration in males and females.
These two chromosomes were designated the X and Y sex chromosomes. 
The human female has two X chromosomes, and the human male has one X and one Y chromosome.
As we shall see, however, these observations are insufficient to conclude that the Y chromosome determines maleness.

Chromosomes, Sex Differentiation, and Sex Determination in Humans

In our discussion of X-linkage in Chapter 4, we pointed out that, as part of the diploid chromosome composition of both humans and Drosophila, females possess two X chromosomes while males possess one X and one Y chromosome.
This observation might lead us to conclude that the Y chromosome causes maleness in both species; however this is not necessarily the case.
Perhaps the lack of a second X chromosome somehow causes maleness while the Y plays no part whatsoever in sex determination.
Perhaps the presence of two X chromosomes causes femaleness while the Y plays no role.
The evidence that clarified which explanation was correct awaited the study of variations the sex chromosome composition of both humans and flies.
As we shall see, the first explanation, where the Y determines maleness, is valid in humans but invalid in Drosophila.

Klinefelter and Turner Syndromes 

About 1940 it was observed that two human abnormalities, the Klinefelter and Turner syndromes,* are characterized by aberrant sexual development.
Individuals with Klinefelter syndrome have genitalia and internal ducts that are usually male, but their testes are underdeveloped and fail to produce sperm.
Although masculine development occurs, feminine sexual development is not entirely suppressed.
Slight enlargement of the breasts is common, for example.
This ambiguous sexual development, referred to as intersexuality, may lead to abnormal social development.

In Turner syndrome, the affected individual has female external genitalia and internal ducts, but the ovaries are rudimentary. 
Other characteristic abnormalities include short stature (usually under five feet); a webbed neck; and a broad, shieldlike chest.

In 1959, the karyotypes of individuals with these syndromes were independently determined to be abnormal with respect to the sex chromosomes.
Individuals with Klinefelter syndrome most often are trisomic and have an XXY complement in addition to 44 autosomes [Figure 9.l(a)].
People with this karyotype are designated 47,XXY.
Individuals with Turner syndrome are most often monosomic and have only 45 chromosomes, including just a single X chromosome.
They are designated 45,X [Figure 9.1(b)].
Note the convention used in designating the above chromosome compositions.
The number indicates how many chromosomes are present, and the information after the comma designates the deviation from the normal diploid content.
Both conditions result from nondisjunction of the X chromosomes during meiosis (see Figure 2.14).

These karyotypes and their corresponding sexual phenotypes allow us to conclude that the Y chromosome determines maleness in humans.
In its absence, the sex of the individual is female, even if only a single X chromosome is present.
The presence of the Y chromosome in the individual with Klinefelter syndrome is sufficient to determine maleness, even though its expression is not complete.
Similarly, in the absence of a Y chromosome, as in the case of individuals with Turner syndrome, no masculinization occurs.

Klinefelter syndrome occurs in about 2 of every 1000 male births.
The karyotypes 48,XXXY, 48,XXYY, 49,XXXXY, and 49,XXXYY are similar phenotypically to 47,XXY, but manifestations are often more severe in individuals with a greater number of X chromosomes.

Karyotypes other than 45,X also lead to Turner syndrome. 
These include individuals who display two different genetic cell lines in their tissues, each exhibiting a different karyotype. 
Such individuals are called mosaics.
The two cell lines result from a mitotic error during early development, the most common chromosome combinations being 45,X/46,XY and 45,X/46,XX. 
Thus, an embryo that began life with a normal karyotype can give rise to an individual whose cells show a mixture of karyotypes and who expresses this syndrome.

Turner syndrome is observed in only about 1 in 3000 female births, a frequency much lower than that for Klinetelter syndrome. 
One explanation for this difference is the observation that a substantial majority of 45,X fetuses die in utero and are aborted spontaneously.
Thus, a similar frequency of the two syndromes may occur at conception. 

47,XXX Syndrome

The presence of three X chromosomes along with a normal set of autosomes (47,XXX) results in female differentiation. 
This syndrome, which is estimated to occur in about 1 of 1200 female births, is highly variable in expression.
Frequently, 47,XXX women are perfectly normal.
In other cases, underdeveloped secondary sex characteristics, sterility, and mental retardation may occur.
In rare instances, 48,XXXX and 49,XXXXX karyotypes have been reported.
The syndromes associated with these karyotypes are similar to, but more pronounced than, the 47,XXX.
Thus in many cases, the presence of additional X chromosomes appears to disrupt the delicate balance of genetic information essential to normal female development. 

47,XYY Condition

Another human trisomy involving the sex chromosomes, 47,XYY, has been discovered and intensively investigated.
Studies of this condition, where the only deviation from diploidy is the presence of an additional Y chromosome in an otherwise normal male karyotype, have led to an interesting controversy.

In 1965, Patricia Jacobs discovered 9 of 315 males in a Scottish maximum security prison to have the 47,XYY kariotype. 
These males were significantly above average in height and had been involved in criminal acts of serious social consequence. 
Of the nine males studied, seven were of subnormal intelligence, and all suffered personality disorders.
In several other studies, similar findings were obtained.

Because of these investigations, the phenotype and frequency of the 47,XYY condition in criminal and noncriminal populations have been examined more extensively (see Table 9.2).
Above-average height (usually over six feet tall) and subnormal intelligence have been generally substantiated, and the frequency of males displaying this karyotype is indeed higher in penal and mental institutions compared with unincarcerated males.

The possible correlation between this chromosome composition and antisocial and criminal behavior has been of considerable interest.
A particularly relevant question involves the characteristics displayed by XYY males who are not incarcerated. 
The only nearly constant association is that such individuals are over 6 feet tall!

A study that addressed this issue was initiated to identify 47,XYY individuals at birth and to follow their behavioral patterns during preadult and adult development.
By 1974 the two primary investigators, Stanley Walzer and Park Gerald, had identified about 20 XYY newborns in 15,000 births at Boston Hospital for women.
However, they soon came under great pressure to abandon their research.
Those opposed to the study argued that the investigation could not be justified and might cause great harm to those individuals who displayed this karyotype. 
They argued that (l) no association between the additional Y chromosome and abnormal behavior had been previously established in the population at large, and (2) by "labeling" these individuals, a self-fulfilling prophecy might be created.
That is, as a result of participation in the study, parents, relatives, and friends might treat those identified as 47,XYY differently, perhaps leading to the type of antisocial behavior expected of them.
Despite the support of a government funding agency and the faculty at Harvard Medical School, Walzer and Gerald abandoned the investigation in 1975.

Because it is now clear that many XYY males do not exhibit any form of antisocial behavior and lead normal lives, we must conclude that there is a high, but not constant correlation between the extra Y chromosome and behavior.

Sexual Differentiation in Humans 

Once researchers had established that, in humans, it is the Y chromosome that houses genetic information necessary for maleness, efforts were made to pinpoint a specific gene or genes capable of providing the "signal" responsible for sex determination. 
Before pursuing a discussion of this topic, it is important to introduce the concept of sexual differentiation in order to better comprehend ho adult male and female humans arise.
During early development, every human embryo undergoes a period when it is potentially hermaphroditic or bisexual.
Gonadal primordial arise as a pair of ridges associated with each embryonic kidney.
Primordial germ cells migrate to these ridges, where an outer cortex and inner medulla form.
The cortex is capable of developing into an ovary, while the inner medulla may develop into a testis.
In addition, two sets of undifferentiated male (Wolffian) and female (Mullerian) ducts exist in each embryo. 

The genital ridge is present after five weeks of gestation, and if these cells have the XY constitution, male development of the medullary region can be detected by the seventh week. 
However, in the absence of the Y chromosome, no male development is initiated, and the genital ridge is destined subsequently to form ovarian tissue.
Parallel development of the appropriate male or female duct system then occurs, and the other duct system degenerates.
A substantial amount of evidence indicates that in males, once testes differentiation is initiated, the embryonic testicular tissue secretes a hormone that is essential for continued male sexual differentiation.

Table 9.2

Frequency of XYY individuals in various settings

Setting.
Restriction.
Number Studied.
Number XYY.
Frequency XYY.


Control population.
Newborus.
28,366.
29.
0.10%.


Mental-penal.
No height restriction.
4,239.
82.
1.93.


Penal.
No height restriction .
5,805.
26.
0.44.


Mental.
No height restriction.
2,562.
8.
0.31.


Mental-penal.
Height restriction.
1,048.
48.
4.61.


Penal Height restriction.
1,683.
31.
1.84.


Mental.
Height restriction.
649.
9.
1.38.


In the absence of male development, the differentiation of the ovary and female duct system occurs.
As the twelfth week of fetal development approaches, the oogonia within the ovaries begin meiosis and primary oocytes can be detected.
By the twenty-fifth week of gestation, all oocytes become arrested in meiosis, where all will remain dormant until puberty is reached some 10 to 15 years later.
Primary spermatocytes, on the other hand, are not formed in males until puberty is reached.

We can conclude that genetic information on the sex chromosomes is responsible for the primary sex determination event.
Under normal conditions, once testicular or ovarian development has begun, subsequent early differentiation occurs under the influence of the male or female sex hormones.
These hormones support, if not determine, expression of other secondary sexual characteristics during development.

The Y Chromosome and Male Development 

Before turning to other types of chromosome variation and their effects in humans and other organisms, it is relevant to review information available concerning how the Y chromosome results in male development in humans.
We have previously alluded to the fact that this chromosome, unlike the X, is nearly genetically blank.
Although it shares only limited homology with loci on the X chromosome, it does carry genetic information that controls sexual development.

Therefore, some region of the Y chromosome exists, presumably a gene, that is responsible for encoding a product called the testis-determining factor (TDF), a gene product that somehow triggers the undifferentiated gonadal tissue of the embryo to form testes.
In its absence, female development occurs. 
Research has focused on just what constitutes the region and the product.

It is now clear that a small part of the human Y chromosome contains a gene called SRY (sex-determining region Y) that encodes TDF.
Evidence proving that SRY is the responsible gene has relied on the molecular geneticist's ability to identify the presence or absence of DNA sequences in rare individuals whose expected sex chromosome composition does not correspond to their sexual phenotype.
For example, there are human males who demonstrate two X and no Y chromosomes.
They have attached to one of their Xs the region of the Y containing SRY.
There are also females who have one X and one Y chromosome. 
Their Y is missing the SRY region.
These observations argue strongly in favor of the role of SRY in male development. 

The final proof that this gene is responsible for causing maleness involves an experiment using transgenic mice.
Such animals are produced from fertilized eggs that have foreign DNA injected into them, which has been incorporated into the genetic composition of the developing embryo.
In normal mice, a chromosome region designated Sry has been identified that is comparable to SRY in humans.
When DNA containing only mouse SRY is injected into normal XX mouse eggs, most animals develop into males!

These studies suggest that the relevant gene has been identified. 
It is present in all mammals so far examined, having been conserved throughout evolution.
How the product of this gene triggers the embryonic gonadal tissue to develop into testes rather than ovaries is now a reasonable question to ask and one that is amenable to investigation.

Sex Ratio in Humans

The presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in one sex of a species but not the other provides a potential mechanism for producing equal proportions of male and female offspring. 
The actual proportion of male to female offspring allows the calculation of what is called the sex ratio.
It can be assessed in two ways.
The primary sex ratio reflects the proportion of males and females conceived in a population.
The secondary sex ratio reflects the proportion that are born.
The secondary sex ratio is much easier to determine, but has the disadvantage of not accounting for disproportionate embryonic or fetal mortality, should it occur.

When the secondary sex ratio in the human population is determined using worldwide census data, it does not equal 1.0. 
For example, in the Caucasian population in the United States, the secondary ratio is 1.06, indicating that 106 males are born for each 100 females.
In the black population in the United States, the ratio is 1.025.
In other countries the excess of male births is even greater than reflected in these values.
For example, in Korea, the secondary sex ratio is 1. 15.

To account for the difference between the primary and secondary sex ratios, one possibility is that prenatal female mortality is greater than prenatal male mortality.
If so, it is possible that the primary sex ratio is 1.0 and that it is altered before birth.
However, this hypothesis has been shown to be false.
In fact, just the opposite occurs.
In a Carnegie Institute study, reported in 1948, the sex of approximately 6000 embryos and fetuses recovered from miscarriages and abortions was determined.
On the basis of the data derived from this study, the primary sex ratio was estimated to be 1.079.
More recent data have estimated that this figure is even higher-between 1.20 and 1.60.
Therefore, many more males than females are conceived in the human population. 

It is not clear why such a radical departure from the expected primary sex ratio of 1.0 occurs.
A suitable explanation call be derived only from examining the assumptions upon which the theoretical ratio is based:

1. Because of segregation, males produce equal numbers of X- and Y-bearing sperm.
2. Each type of sperm has equivalent viability and motility in the female reproductive tract.
3. The egg surface is equally receptive to both X- and Y-bearing sperm.

There is no strong experimental evidence to suggest that any of these assumptions are invalid.
However, it has been speculated that, because the human Y chromosome is smaller than the X chromosome, Y-bearing sperm are of less mass and therefore more motile.
If this is true, then the probability of a fertilization event leading to a male zygote is increased, providing one possible explanation for the observed primary ratio. 

Dosage Compensation in Humans

The presence of two X chromosomes in normal human females and only one X in normal human males is unique compared with the equal numbers of autosomes present in the cells of both sexes. 
On theoretical grounds alone, it is possible to speculate that this disparity should create a "genetic dosage" problem between males and females for all X-linked genes.
Females have two copies and males only one.
Therefore, there is the potential for producing twice as much of each gene product for all X-linked genes.
The additional X chromosomes in both males and females exhibiting the various syndromes discussed earlier in this chapter should serve to compound this dosage problem.
In this section, we will describe certain research findings regarding X-linked gene expression which demonstrate that a genetic mechanism underlying dosage compensation dots indeed exist.

Barr Bodies

Murray L. Barr and Ewart G. Bertram's experiments with temale cats, and Keith Moore and Barr's subsequent study with humans, demonstrate a genetic mechanism in mammals that compensates for X chromosome dosage disparities.
Barr and Bertram observed a darkly staining body in interphase nerve cells of female cats.
They found that this structure was absent in similar cells of males.
In human females, this body can be easily demonstrated in cells derived from the buccal mucosa or in fibroblasts but not in similar male cells (Figure 9.2). 
This highly condensed structure, about 1 Mm in diameter, lies against the nuclear envelope of interphase cells.
It stains positively in the Feulgen reaction for DNA.

Current experimental evidence demonstrates that this body, called a sex chromatin body or simply a Barr body, is an inactivated X chromosome.
Susumo Ohno was the first to suggest that the Barr body arises from one of the two X chromosomes.
This hypothesis is attractive because it provides a mechanism for dosage compensation.
If one of the two X chromosomes is inactive in the cells of females, the dosage of genetic information that can be expressed in males and females is equivalent.
Convincing but indirect evidence for this hypothesis comes from the study of the sex chromosome syndromes described earlier in this chapter.
Regardless of how many X chromosomes exist, all but one of them appear to be inactivated and can be seen as Barr bodies.
For example, none is seen in Turner 45,X females; one is seen in Klinefelter 47,XXY males; two in 47,XXX females; three in 48,XXXX females; and so on (Figure 9.3).
Therefore, the number of Barr bodies follows an N - 1 rule, where N is the total number of X chromosomes present.

Although this mechanism of inactivation of all but one X chromosome increases our understanding of dosage compensation, it further complicates our perception of other matters.
Because one of the two X chromosomes is inactivated in normal human females, why then is the Turner 45,X individual not entirely normal?
Why aren't females with the triplo-X and tetra-X karyotypes (47,XXX and 48,XXXX) normal?
Further, in Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY), X chromosome inactivation effectively renders such individuals 46,XY.
Why aren't they unaffected by the additional X chromosome in their nuclei?

One possible explanation is that chromosome inactivation does not normally occur in the very early stages of development of those cells destined to form gonadal tissues.
Another possible explanation is that not all of each X chromosome forming a Barr body is inactivated.
As a result, excessive expression of certain X-linked genes might still occur despite apparent inactivation of additional X chromosomes.
Experimental support exists for both of these explanations.

The Lyon Hypothesis

In mammalian females one X chromosome is of maternal origin, and the other is of paternal origin.
Which one is inactivated? 
Is the inactivation random?
Is the same chromosome inactive in all somatic cells?
In 1961, Mary Lyon and Liane Russell independently proposed a hypothesis that answers these questions.
They postulated that the inactivation of X chromosomes occurs randomly in somatic cells at a point early in embryonic development, and that once inactivation has occurred, all progeny cells have the same X chromosome inactivated. 

Figure 9.0

Demonstration of the X and Y chromosomes in a mammalian fetal cell using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)

Figure 9.1

The karyotypes and phenotypic depictions of (a) Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) and (b) Turner syndrome (45,X)

The sex chromosome compositions that vary from the normal human karyotype are labeled.

Figure 9.2

Photomicrographs comparing a cheek epithelial cell nucleus from a male that fails to reveal a Barr body (top) with a cheek cell from a female that demonstrates a Barr body (indicated by arrow in bottom image)

This structure, also called a sex chromatin body, represents an inactivated X chromosome.

Figure 9.3

Diagrammatic representation of Barr body occurrence in various human karyotypes, where all X chromosomes except one (N - I) are inactivated

Figure 9.4

Diagrammatic representation of the Lyon hypothesis in a representative mammal

At an early stage in development, either the maternal or paternal X chromosome (shown in two different colors) is randomly inactivated in each cell, forming a Barr body.
All progeny cells then inactivate the same X chromosomes as their progenitor cell, forming clones of like cells.
In females heterozygous for the X-linked alleles, the adult is a mosaic for each such gene, with some groups of cells expressing one of the alleles and other groups expressing the other allele, as shown for coat color in the mouse.
Although we have shown initial inactivation to occur at the four-cell stage, it actually occurs later during development.

Structure and Analysis of DNA and RNA

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

With few exceptions, the nucleic acid DNA serves as the genetic material in every living thing.
The structure of DNA provides the chemical basis for storing and expressing genetic information within cells, as well as transmitting it to future generations.
The molecule takes the form of a doublestranded helix united by hydrogen bonds formed between complementary nucleotides.
RNA shares many similarities to DNA in its structure, but is single-stranded.
RNA most often functions during the expression of genetic information, and in some viruses it serves as the genetic material.

In Part 1 of the text we discussed the presence of genes on chromosomes that control phenotypic traits and the way in which the chromosomes are transmitted through gametes to future offspring.
Logically, some form of information must be contained in genes, which, when passed to a new generation, influences the form and characteristics of the offspring; this is called the genetic information .
We might also conclude that this same information in some way directs the many complex processes leading to the adult form.

Until 1944 it was not clear what chemical component of the chromosome makes up genes and constitutes the genetic material. 
Because chromosomes were known to have both a nucleic acid and a protein component, both were considered candidates. 
In 1944, however, there emerged direct experimental evidence that the nucleic acid, DNA, serves as the informational basis for the process of heredity.

Once the importance of DNA in genetic processes is realized, work was intensified with the hope of discerning not only the structural basis of this molecule but also the relationship of its structure to its function.
Between 1944 and 1953, many scientists sought information that might answer one of the most significant and intriguing questions in the history of biology: 
How does DNA serve as the genetic basis for living processes? 
The answer was believed to depend strongly on the chemical structure of the DNA molecule, given the complex but orderly functions ascribed to it.

These efforts were rewarded in 1953 when James Watson and Francis Crick set forth their hypothesis for the double-helical nature of DNA.
The assumption that the molecule's functions would be clarified more easily once its general structure was determined proved to be correct.
This chapter initially reviews the evidence that DNA is the genetic material and then discusses the elucidation of its structure.

Characteristic of the Genetic Material 

The genetic material has several characteristics:
replication, storage of information, expression of that information, and variation by mutation .
"Replication" of the genetic material is one facet of the cell cycle, a fundamental property of all living organisms.
Once the genetic material of cells has been replicated, it must then be partitioned equally into daughter cells.
During the formation of gametes, the genetic material is also replicated but is partitioned so that each cell gets only one-half of the original amount of genetic material.
This process is called meiosis.
Although the products of mitosis and meiosis are different, these processes are both part of the more general phenomenon of cellular reproduction. 

The characteristic of "storage" may be viewed as genetic information that is present as a repository of all hereditary characteristics of an organism.
However, that information may or may not be expressed.
It is clear that, whereas most cells contain a complete complement of DNA, at any given point they express only a part of this genetic potential.
For example, bacteria turn many genes on only in response to specific environmental conditions, only to turn them off when such conditions change.
Invertebrates, skin cells may display active melanin genes hut never activate their hemoglobin genes; digestive cells activate many genes specific to their function, but do not activate their melanin genes.

Inherent in the concept of storage is the need for the genetic material to be able to encode the nearly infinite variety of gene products found among the countless forms of life present on our planet.
The chemical language of the genetic material roust be capable of this potential task as it stores information and as it is transmitted to progeny cells and organisms.

"Expression" of the stored genetic information is a complex process and is the basis for the concept of information flow within the cell.
Figure 10.1 shows a simplified illustration of this concept.
The initial event is the transcription of DNA, resulting in the synthesis of three types of RNA molecules:
messenger RNA (mRNA) , transfer RNA (tRNA) , and ribosomal RNA (rRNA) .
Of these, mRNAs are translated into proteins.
Each type of mRNA is the product of a specific gene and leads to the synthesis of a different protein.
Translation occurs in conjunction with rRNA-containing ribosomes and involves tRNA, which acts as an adaptor to convert the chemical information in mRNA to the amino acids that make up proteins. 
Collectively, these processes serve as the foundation for the central dogma of molecular genetics :
"DNA makes RNA, which makes proteins".

The genetic material is also the source of newly arising "variability" among organisms through the process of mutation. 
If a mutation -a change in the chemical composition of DNA- occurs, the alteration will be reflected during transcription and translation, often affecting the specified protein.
If a mutation is present in gametes, it will be passed to future generations and, with time, may become distributed in the population. 
Genetic variation, which also includes rearrangements within and between chromosomes (see Chapter 9), provides the raw material for the process of evolution.

The Genetic Material: 1900-1944 

The idea that gene tic material is physically transmitted from parent to offspring has been accepted for as long as the concept of inheritance has existed.
Beginning in the late nineteenth century, research into the structure of biomolecules progressed considerably, setting the stage for the description of the genetic material in chemical terms.
Although proteins and nucleic acid were both considered major candidates for the role of the genetic material, many geneticists, until the 1940s, favored proteins.
Three factors contributed to this belief. 

First, proteins are abundant in cells.
Although the protein content may vary considerably, these molecules account for over 50 percent of the dry weight of cells.
Because cells contain such a large amount and variety of proteins, it is not surprising that early geneticists believed that some of this protein could function as the genetic material.

The second factor was the accepted proposal for the chemical structure of nucleic acids during the early to mid-1900s.
DNA was first studied in 1868 by Friedrick Miescher, a Swiss chemist.
He was able to separate nuclei from the cytoplasm of cells and then isolate from these nuclei an acidic substance that he called nuclein.
Miescher showed that nuclein contained large amounts of phosphorus and no sulfur, characteristics that differentiate it from proteins.

As analytical techniques were improved, nucleic acids, including DNA, were shown to be composed of four similar molecular building blocks called nucleotides.
About 1910, Phoebus A. Levene proposed the tetranucleotide hypothesis to explain the chemical arrangement of these nucleotides in nucleic acids.
He proposed that a very simple four-nucleotide unit, as shown in Figure 10.2, was repeated over and over in DNA.
Levene based his proposal on studies of the composition of the four types of nucleotides.
Although his actual data revealed proportions of the four nucleotides that varied considerably, he assumed a 1:1:1:1 ratio.
The discrepancy was ascribed to inadequate analytical technique.

Because a single covalently bonded tetranucleotide structure was relatively simple, geneticists believed nucleic acids could not provide the large amount of chemical variation expected for the genetic material.
Proteins, on the other hand, contain 20 different amino acids, thus providing the basis for substantial variation.
As a result, attention was directed away from nucleic acids, strengthening the speculation that proteins served as the genetic material.

The third contributing factor simply concerned the areas of most active research in genetics.
Before 1940, most geneticists were engaged in the study of transmission genetics and mutation.
The excitement generated in these areas undoubtedly diluted the concern for finding the precise molecule that serves as the genetic material.
Thus, proteins were the most promising candidate and were accepted rather passively. 

Between 1910 and 1930, other proposals for the structure of nucleic acids were advanced, but they were generally overturned in favor of the tetranucleotide hypothesis.
It was not until the 1940s that the work of Erwin Chargaff led to the realization that Levene's hypothesis was incorrect.
Chargaff showed that, for most organisms, the 1:1:1:1 ratio was inaccurate, disproving Levene's hypothesis.

Evidence Favoring DNA as the Genetic Material in Bacteria and Bacteriophages

The 1944 publication by Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty concerning the chemical nature of a "transforming principle" in bacteria marked the initial event leading to the acceptance of DNA as the genetic material.
Along with the subsequent findings of other research teams, this work constituted direct experimental proof that, in the organisms studied, DNA, and not protein, is the biomolecule responsible for heredity. 
This period marked the beginning of an era of discovery in biology that has revolutionized our understanding of life on Earth.
The impact of these findings parallels the work that followed the publication of Darwin's theory of evolution and that following the rediscovery of Mendel's postulates of transmission genetics.
Together, these constituted three grant revolutions in biology.

The initial evidence implicating DNA as the genetic material was derived from studies of prokaryotic bacteria and viruses that infect them.
The reasons for the use of bacteria and bacterial viruses will become apparent as we discuss the experiments.
Primarily, the reason is that bacteria and viruses are capable of rapid growth because they complete their life cycles in hours.
They can also be experimentally manipulated, and mutations can be easily induced and selected, making them ideal for experimentation of this sort.

Transformation Studies

The research that provided the foundation for Avery, McLeod, and McCarty's work was initiated in 1927 by Frederick Griffith, a medical officer in the British Ministry of Health.
He performed experiments with several different strains of the bacterium Diplococcus pneumoniae . [3] 
Some were virulent strains, which cause pneumonia in certain vertebrates (notably humans and mice), whereas others were avirulent strains, which do not cause illness.

The difference in virulence is related to the polysaccharide capsule of the bacterium.
Virulent strains have this capsule, whereas avirulent strains do not.
The nonencapsulated bacteria are readily engulfed and destroyed by phagocytic cells in the animal's circulatory system.
Virulent bacteria, which possess the polysaccharide coat, are not easily engulfed; they are able to multiply and c use pneumonia.

The presence or absence of the capsule is the basis for another characteristic difference between virulent and virulent strains.
Encapsulated bacteria form a smooth, shiny-surfaced colony (S) when grown on an agar culture plate; nonencapsulated strains produce rough colonies (R) (Figure 10.3).
This allows virulent and avirulent strains to be distinguished easily by standard microbiological culture techniques.

Each strain of Diplococcus may be one of dozens of different types called serotypes.
The specificity of the serotype is due to the detailed chemical structure of the polysaccharide constituent of the thick, slimy capsule.
Serotypes are identified by immunological techniques and are usually designated by Roman numerals.
In the United States, types I and II are most common in causing pneumonia. 
Griffith used types II and III in the critical experiments that led to new concepts about the genetic material.
Table 10.1 summarizes the characteristics of Griffith's two strains. 

Griffith knew from the work of others that only living virulent cells would produce pneumonia in mice.
If heat-killed virulent bacteria are injected into mice, no pneumonia results, just as living avirulent bacteria fail to produce the disease. 
Griffith's critical experiment (Figure 10.3) involved an injection into mice of living IIR (avirulent) cells combined with heat-killed IIIS (virulent) cells.
Since neither cell type caused death in mice when injected alone, Griffith expected that the double injection would not kill the mice.
But, after five days, all mice receiving double injections were dead.
Analysis of the blood of the dead mice revealed large numbers of living type IIIS (virulent) bacteria!

Table 10.1

Strains of Diplococcus pneumoniae Used by Frederick Griffith in his Original Transformation Experiments 

Serotype.
Colony Morphology.
Capsule.
Virulence.


IIR.
Rough.
Absent.
Avirulent.


IIIS.
Smooth.
Present.
Virulent .


As far as could be determined regarding the capsular polysaccharide, these IIIS bacteria were identical to the IIIS strain from which the heat-killed cell preparation had been made.
The control mice, injected only with living avirulent IIR bacteria for this set of experiments, did not develop pneumonia and remained healthy.
This finding ruled out the possibility that the avirulent IIR cells had simply changed (or mutated) to virulent IIIS cells in the absence of the heat-killed IIIS fraction.
Instead, some type of interaction was required between living IIR and heat-killed IIIS cells.

Griffith thus concluded that the heat-killed IIIS bacteria were somehow responsible for converting live avirulent IIR cells into virulent IIIS ones.
Calling the phenomenon transformation, he suggested that the transforming principle might be some part of the polysaccharide capsule or some compound required for capsule synthesis, although the capsule alone did not cause pneumonia. 
To use Griffith's term, the transforming principle from the dead IIIS cells served as a "pabulum" for the IIR cells. 

Griffith's work led other physicians and bacteriologists to research the phenomenon of transformation.
By 1931, Henry Dawson, at the Rockefeller Institute, had confirmed Griffith's observations and extended his work one step further.
Dawson and his co-workers showed that transformation could occur in vitro (in a test tube).
When heat-killed IIIS cells were incubated with living IIR cells, living IIIS cells were recovered. 
Therefore, injection into mice was not necessary for transformation to occur.
By 1933, Lionel J. Alloway had refined the in vitro system by using crude extracts of S cells and living R cells.
The soluble filtrate from the heat-killed S cells was as effective in inducing transformation as were the intact cells!
Alloway and others did not view transformation as a genetic event, but rather as a physiological modification of some sort.
Nevertheless, the experimental evidence that a chemical substance was responsible for transformation was quite convincing.

Then, in 1944, after 10 years of work, Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty published their results in what is now regarded as a classic paper in the field of molecular genetics.
They reported that they had obtained the transforming principle in a purified state, and that beyond reasonable doubt, the molecule responsible for transformation was DNA.

The details of the work, sometimes called the Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty experiment, are outlined in Figure 10.4.
These researchers began their isolation procedure with large quantities (50 to 75 liters) of liquid cultures of type IIIS virulent cells. 
The cells were centrifuged, collected, and heat-killed. 
Following homogenization and several extractions with the detergent deoxycholate (DOC), they obtained a soluble filtrate that, when tested, still contained the transforming principle. 
Protein was removed from the active filtrate by several chloroform extractions' and polysaccharides were enzymatically digested and removed.
Finally, precipitation with ethanol yielded a fibrous mass that still retained the ability to induce transformation of the IIR avirulent cells.
From the original 75-liter sample, the procedure yielded 10 to 25 mg of the "active factor".

Further testing established beyond a reasonable doubt that the transforming principle was DNA.
The fibrous mass was first analyzed for its nitrogen/phosphorus ratio, which was shown to coincide with the ratio of "sodium desoxyribonucleate," the chemical name then used to describe DNA.
To solidify their findings, they sought to eliminate, to the greatest extent possible, all probable contaminants from their final product.
Thus, it was treated with the proteolytic enzymes trypsin and chymotrypsin and then with an RNA-digesting enzyme, called ribonuclease.
Such treatments destroyed any remaining activity of proteins and RNA.
Nevertheless, transforming activity still remained. 
Chemical testing of the final product gave strong positive reactions for DNA.
The final confirmation came with experiments using crude samples of the DNA-digesting enzyme deoxyribonuclease, which was isolated from dog and rabbit sera.
Digestion with this enzyme was shown to destroy transforming activity. 
There could be little doubt that the active transforming principle was DNA!

The great amount of work, the confirmation and reconfirmation of the conclusions drawn, and the unambiguous logic of the experimental design involved in the research of these three scientists are truly impressive.
The conclusion to the 1944 publication was, however, very simply stated:
"The evidence presented supports the belief that a nucleic acid of the desoxyribose [4] type is the fundamental unit of the transforming principle of Pneumococcus Type III". 

Avery and his co-workers recognized the genetic and biochemical implications of their work when they observed that "nucleic acids of this type must be regarded not merely as structurally important but as functionally active in determining the biochemical activities and specific characteristics of pneumococcal cells." This suggested that the transforming principle interacts with the IIR cell and gives rise to a coordinated series of enzymatic reactions culminating in the synthesis of the type IIIS capsular polysaccharide.
They emphasized that, once transformation occurs, the capsular polysaccharide is produced in successive generations.
Transformation is therefore heritable, and the process affects the genetic material.

Immediately after the publication of the report, several investigators turned to or intensified their studies of transformation in order to clarify the role of DNA in genetic mechanisms.
In particular, the work of Rollin Hotchkiss was instrumental in confirming that the critical factor in transformation was DNA, and not protein.
In 1949, in a separate study, Harriet Taylor isolated an extremely rough (ER) mutant strain from a rough (R) strain.
This ER strain produced colonies that were more irregular than the R strain.
The DNA from R accomplished the transformation of ER to R.
Thus, the R strain, which served as the recipient in the Avery experiments, was shown also to be able to serve as the DNA donor in transformation. 

Transformation has now been shown to occur in Hemophilus influenzae , Bacillus subtilis , Shigella paradysenteriae , and Escherichia coli , among many other microorganisms.
Transformation of numerous genetic traits other than colony morphology has also been demonstrated, including ones involving resistance to antibiotics and the ability to metabolize various nutrients, These observations further strengthened the belief that transformation by DNA is primarily a genetic event, rather than simply a physiological change.
This idea is pursued again in the "Insights and Solutions" section at the end of this chapter.

Figure 10.0

James D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick with one of their early DNA models

Figure 10.1

A simplifield view of information flow involving DNA, RNA, and proteins within cell 

Figure 10.2

Diagrammatic depiction of Levene's proposed tetranucleotide containing one molecule each of the four nitrogenous bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T) Each block represents a nucleotide 

Other potential sequences of four nuclectides are possible.

Figure 10.3

Summary of Grifflth">s transformation experiment The photographs show bacterial colonies containing cells with capsules (type IIIS) and without capsules (type IIR) 

Figure 10.4

Summary of Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty's experiment demonstrating that DNA is the transforming principle

[3] Note that this organism is no designated Streptococcus pneumonia.

[4] Desoxyribose is now spelled deoxyribose.

DNA Replication and Recombination 

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Genetic continuity between parental and progeny cells is made possible by semiconservative replication of DNA, as predicted by the Watson-Crick model.

Each stands of the parent helix serves as a template for the production of its complement.
Synthesis of DNA is a complex but orderly process, orchestrated by a myriad of enzymes and other molecules.
Together, they function with great fidelity to polymerize nucleotides into polynucleotide chains. 
Genetic recombination is also a process that involves the interaction of DNA molecules with a group of enzymes.

Following Watson and Crick's proposal for the structure of DNA, scientists focused their attention on how this molecule is replicated.
This process is an essential function of the genetic material and must he executed precisely if genetic continuity between cells is to be maintained following cell division. 

This is an enormous, complex task.
Consider for a second that some 10 (three billion) base pairs exist within the 23 chromosomes of the human genome.
To duplicate faithfully the DNA of just one of these chromosomes requires a mechanism of extreme precision.
Even an error rate of only 10-6 (one in a million) will still create 3000 errors, obviously an excessive number, during each replication cycle of the genome. 
While not error free, a much more accurate system of DNA replication has evolved that functions in all organisms. 

As Watson and Crick suggested in their 1953 paper, the model of the double helix provided them with the initial insight into how replication could occur.
This mode, called semiconservative replication, has since received strong experimental support from studies of viruses, prokaryotes, and eukaryotes.

Once the general mode of replication was made clear, research was intensified to determine the precise details of DNA synthesis. 
What has since been discovered is that numerous enzymes and other proteins are needed to copy a DNA helix.

Because of the complexity of the chemical events during synthesis, this subject remains an extremely active area of research. 

This chapter will examine the general mode of replication as well as the specific details of the synthesis of DNA.
The research leading to this knowledge is still another link in our understanding of life processes at the molecular level. 

The Mode of DNA Replication

It was apparent to Watson and Crick that because of the arrangement and nature of the nitrogenous bases, each strand of a DNA double helix could serve as a template for the synthesis of its complement (Figure 11.1).
They proposed that if the helix were unwound, each nucleotide along the two parent strands would have an affinity -for its complementary nucleotide. 
As we learned in Chapter 1O, the complementarity is due to the potential hydrogen bonds that can be formed.

If thymidylic acid (T) were present, it could "attract" adenylic acid (A); if guanidylic acid (G) were present, it would "attract" cytidylic acid (C); and so on.
If these nucleotides were then covalently linked into polynucleotide chains along both templates, the result would be the production of two identical double strands of DNA.
Each replicated DNA molecule would consist of one "old" and one "new" strand; hence, the reason for the name "semiconservative replication".

There are two other possible modes of replication (Figure 11.2) that also rely on the parental strands as a template.
In conservative replication, synthesis of complementary polynucleotide chains would occur as described above.
Following synthesis, however, the two newly created strands are brought back together, and the parental strands reassociate.
The original helix is thus "conserved".

In the second alternative mode, called dispersive replication, the parental strands are seen to be dispersed into two new double helices following replication.
Thus, each strand consists of both old and new DNA.
This mode would involve cleavage of the parental strands during replication.
Therefore, it is the most complex of the three possibilities and is therefore least likely to occur.
It could not, however, be ruled out as an experimental model.
The theoretical results of two generations of replication by the conservative and dispersive modes are compared with those of the semiconservative mode in Figure 11.2.

The Meselson-Stahl Experiment

In 195S, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl published the results of an experiment providing strong evidence that semiconservative replication is the mode used by cells to produce new DNA molecules. 
E. coli cells were grown for many generations in a medium where 15NH4CL (ammonium chloride) was the only nitrogen source.
A "heavy" isotope of nitrogen, 15N contains one more neutron than the naturally occurring 14N isotope.
Unlike "radioactive" isotopes, 15N is stable and is thus not radioactive.
After many generations, all nitrogen-containing molecules, including the nitrogenous bases of DNA, contained the isotope in the E. coli cells.
DNA containing l5N may be distinguished from 14N-containing DNA by the use of sedimentation equilibrium centrifugation, where samples are "forced" by centrifugation through a density gradient of a heavy metal salt such as cesium chloride (see Chapter 10).
The more dense 15N-DNA will reach equilibrium in the gradient at a point closer to the bottom (where the density is greater) than will 14N-DNA.

In this experiment, E. coli cells were grown for several generations in the presence of the heavy isotope, resulting in uniformly labeled 15N cells. 
They were then transferred to a medium containing only 14NH4CL.
Thus, all subsequent synthesis of DNA during replication contained the "lighter" isotope of nitrogen.
The time of transfer was taken as time zero (t = 0).
The E. coli cells where allowed to replicate during several generations with cell samples removed at various intervals.
From each sample, DNA was isolated and subjected to sedimentation equilibrium centrifugation. 
The results are depicted in Figure 11.3.

After one generation, the isolated DNA was all present in a single band of intermediate density-the expected result for semiconservative replication.
Each replicated molecule would be composed of one new 14N-strand and one old N15-strand, as seen in Figure 11.4.
This result was not consistent with the conservative replication mode, in which two distinct bands would have been predicted to occur.

After two cell divisions, DNA samples showed two density bands:
One was intermediate and the other was lighter, corresponding to the 14N position in the gradient.
Similar results occurred after a third generation, except that the proportion of the 14N-band increased.
This was again consistent with the interpretation that replication is semiconservative.

Two observations served as the basis for ruling out the dispersive mode of replication.
One involved analysis of DNA after the first generation of replication in an 1N-containing medium.
The observation of a molecule exhibiting intermediate density is also consistent with dispersive replication.
However, Meselson and Stahl isolated this hybrid molecule and analyzed it after it had been heat-denatured.
Recall from Chapter 10 that heating will separate a duplex into single strands. 
When the densities of the single strands of the hybrid were determined, they exhibited either an 15N-profile or an 14N-profile, but not an intermediate density.
This observation is consistent with the semiconservative mode but inconsistent with the dispersive mode.

Furthermore, if replication were dispersive, all generations after t = 0 would demonstrate DNA of an intermediate density. 
In each subsequent generation after the first, the ratio of 15N/14N would decrease and the hybrid band would become lighter and lighter, eventually approaching the 14N-band.
This result was not observed.
The Meselson-Stahl experiment provided very conclusive support in bacteria for semiconservative replication and tended to rule out the conservative and dispersive mode.

Semiconservative Replication in Eukaryotes

In 1957, the year before the work of Meselson and his colleagues was published, evidence was presented by J. Herbert Taylor, Philip Woods, and Walter Hughes that semiconservative replication also occurs in a eukaryotic organism.
They experimented with root tips of the broad bean Vicia faba .
Root tips are an excellent source of dividing cells.
These researchers examined the chromosomes of these cells following replication of DNA.
They were able to monitor the process of replication by labeling DNA with 3H-thymidine, a radioactive precursor of DNA, and performing autoradiography. 
In this experiment, labeled thymidine is found only in association with chromosomes that contain newly synthesized DNA. 

The technique of autoradiography, discussed in detail in Appendix A, is a cytological procedure that allows the isotope to be localized within the cell.

In this procedure, a photographic emulsion is placed over a section of cellular material (root tips in this experiment), and the preparation is stored in the dark.
The slide is then developed, much as photographic film is processed.

Because the radioisotope emits energy, the emulsion turns black at the approximate point of emission following development. 
The end result is the presence of dark spots or "grains" on the surface of the section, identifying within the cell the location of newly synthesized DNA.

Root tips were grown for approximately one generation in the presence of the radioisotope and then placed in unlabeled medium, where cell division continued.

At the conclusion of each generation, cultures were arrested metaphase by the addition of colchicine (a chemical derived from the crocus plant that "poisons" the spindle fibers), and chromosomes were examined by autoradiography.
Figure 11.5 illustrates replication of a single chromosome over two division cycles as well as the distribution of grains.

Results are compatible with the semiconservative model of replication.
After the first replication cycle, in the presence of the isotope, radioactivity is detected over both sister chromatids.
This finding is expected because each chromatid will contain one "new" radioactive DNA strand and one "old" unlabeled strand.
After the second replication cycle, which takes place in unlabeled medium, only one of the two new sister chromatids should be radioactive because half of the parent strands are unlabeled.
With only minor exceptions of sister chromatid exchanges (see Chapter 5), this result was observed. 

Together, the Meselson-Stahl experiment and the experiment by Taylor, Woods, and Hughes soon led to the general acceptance of the semiconservative mode of replication.
The same conclusion has been reached in studies with other organisms. 
These experiments also strongly supported Watson and Crick's proposal for the double helix model of DNA.

Origins, Forks, and Units of Replication 

The mode of replication just established represents the general pattern by which DNA is duplicated.
Before turning to the details of how DNA is actually synthesized biochemically, we will briefly address several other issues relevant to the complete description of semiconservative replication.
The first concerns the origin of replication.
Where along the chromosome is DNA replication initiated?
Is there but a single origin, or is there more than one point where DNA synthesis begins?
Is any given point of origin random or is it located at a specific region along the chromosome?

A second issue involves the direction of replication.
Once replication begins, does it proceed in a single direction or in both directions away from the origin?
This consideration distinguishes between unidirectional and bidirectional replication, respectively.

To address these questions, we need to introduce two conceptual components integral to both the discussion and execution of DNA replication.
The first concerns the actual point along the chromosome where replication is occurring.

At such a point the strands of the helix must be unwound, creating what is called a replication fork.
Such a "fork" will initially appear at the point of origin of synthesis.
A replication fork will then move along the DNA duplex as replication proceeds.
If replication is bidirectional, two such forks will be present that will migrate in opposite directions away from the origin.

The second conceptual component involves the length of DNA that is replicated following one initiation event at a single origin.
This length of DNA is referred to as a unit called the replicon.

The evidence is reasonably clear regarding these issues raised initially above.

In bacteria and most bacterial viruses, which have but one circular chromosome, there is only a single region where replication is initiated.
In E. coli this specific region, called oriC, has been mapped along the chromosome.
It consists of 245 base pairs, but only a small number are actually essential to the initiation of DNA synthesis.
Since there is but a single point of origin of DNA synthesis in bacteriophages and bacteria, the entire chromosome constitutes one replicon.

Does replication proceed in a single direction, or in both directions?
In E. coli , the evidence is clear.

Replication is bidirectional from oric, proceeding in both directions.
Two replicati on forks are thus produced, as illustrated in Figure 11.
These forks eventually merge as semiconservative replication of the entire chromosome is completed at a termination region, called ter.

Compared to bacteria, as described above, a major difference in replication exists in eukaryotes.
While replication is bidirectional, creating two replication forks and a replication bubble during each replication cycle (Figure 11.7), there are multiple origins along each chromosome.
As a result, during the S phase of interphase, numerous replicating events are occurring along each chromosome.
Eventually, the numerous replication forks merge, completing replication of the entire chromosome. 
The presence of multiple replicons is undoubtedly related to the much greater length and complexity of a single eukaryotic chromosome compared to one from a bacterium.
As a result, replication can be completed in a more reasonable period of time. 
We will return to the consideration of eukaryotic DNA synthesis later in this chapter.

Synthesis of DNA in Microorganisms 

Determination that replication is semiconservative and bidirectional indicates only the pattern of DNA duplication and the association of finished strands with one another once synthesis is completed.
A much more complex issue is how the actual synthesis of long complementary polynucleotide chains occurs on a DNA template.
As in most studies of molecular biology, this question was first approached by using microorganisms.
Research began about the same time as the Meselson-Stahl work, and even today this topic is an active area of investigation. 
What is most apparent in this research is the tremendous chemical complexity of the biological synthesis of DNA.

DNA Polymerase I

Studies of the enzymology of DNA replication were first reported by Arthur Kornberg and colleagues in 1957 They isolated an enzyme from E. coli that was able to direct DNA synthesis in a cell-free ( in vitro ) system.
The enzyme is now called DNA polymerase I, as it was the first of several to be isolated. 
Kornberg determined that there were two major requirements for in vitro DNA synthesis under the direction of the enzyme:

1. All four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP = dNTP) [5] 
2. Template DNA

If any one of the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates was omitted from the reaction, no measurable synthesis occurred. 
If derivatives of these precursor molecules other than the nucleoside triphosphate were used (nucleotides or nucleoside diphosphates), synthesis did not occur.
If no template DNA was added, synthesis of DNA occurred but was reduced greatly. 
Most synthesis directed by Kornberg's enzyme appeared to be exactly the type required for semiconservative replication. 
The reaction is summarized in Figure 11.8, where the addition of a single nucleotide is depicted.
The enzyme has since been shown to consist of a single polypeptide containing 928 amino acids.

The way in which each nucleotide is added to the growing chain is a function of the specificity of DNA polymerase I.
As shown in Figure 11.9, the precursor dNTP contains the three phosphate groups attached to the 5'-carbon of d-ribose.
As the two terminal phosphates are cleaved during synthesis, the remaining phosphate attached to the 5'-carbon is covalently linked to the 3'-OH group of the d-ribose to which it is added.
Each stop elongates the growing chain by one nucleotide.
Consistent with the above description and Figure 11.9, chain elongation occurs in the 5'-to-3' direction by the addition of nucleotides to the growing 3'end.
Each step provides a newly exposed 3'-OH group that can participate in the next addition of a nucleotide as DNA synthesis proceeds.

Fidelity of Synthesis

Having shown how DNA was synthesized, Kornberg sought to demonstrate the accuracy, or fidelity, with which the enzyme had replicated the DNA template.

Because the nucleotide sequences of the template and the product could not be determined in 1957, he had to rely initially on several indirect methods.

One of Kornberg's approaches was to compare the nitrogenous base compositions of the DNA template with those of the recovered DNA product.
Table 11.1 shows Kornberg's base composition analysis of three different DNA templates.
These may be compared with the DNA product synthesized in each case.
Within experimental error, the base composition of each product agreed with the template DNAs used.

These data, along with other types of comparisons of template and product, suggested that the templates were replicated faithfully. 

Kornberg also used the nearest-neighbor frequency test to assay the fidelity of copying (Figure 11.10).
With this technique, Kornberg determined the frequency with which any two bases occur adjacent to each other along the polynucleotide chain.
This test relies on the enzyme spleen phosphodiesterase, which cleaves the polynucleotide chain in a way that is different from the way in which it was assembled.
As we have pointed out (see Figure 11.9), during synthesis of DNA, 5'-nucleotides are inserted; that is, each nucleotide is added with the phosphate on the C-5' of deoxyribose.
However, the phosphodiesterase enzyme cleaves between the phosphate and the C-5' atom, thereby producing 3'-nucleotides.
If the phosphates on only one of the four nucleotides (cytidylic acid, for example) are radioactive during DNA synthesis, then after enzymatic cleavage a radioactive phosphate will be transferred to the base that is the "nearest neighbor" on the 5' side of all cytidylic acid nucleotides.
Following four separate experiments, where in each case only one of the four nucleotide types is made radioactive, the frequency of all 16 possible nearest neighbors can be calculated.
An example of such data is presented one of the latter problems at the end of this chapter.

Table 11.1

Base Composition of the DNA Template and the Product of Replication in Kornberg's Early Work 

Organism.
Template or Product.
%A.
%T.
%G.
%C.


T2.
Template.
32.7.
33.0.
16.8.
17.5.


T2.
Product.
33.2.
32.1.
17.2.
17.5.


E. coli .
Template.
25.0.
24.3.
24.5.
26.2.


E. coli .
Product.
26.1.
25.1.
24.3.
24.5.


Calf.
Template.
28.9.
26.7 .
22.8.
21.6.


Calf .
Product.
28.7.
27.7.
21.8.
21.8.


When this technique was applied to the DNA template and the resultant product from a variety of experiments, Kornherg found general agreement between the nearest-neighbor frequencies of the two.
This type of analysis is a more stringent measure of the fidelity of copying than is the base composition analysis.
Thus' DNA polymerase I seemed the likely candidate for the synthesis of DNA during replication within the cell, even though Kornberg's experiments were, by necessity, performed in vitro .

Synthesis of Biologically Active DNA

Despite Kornberg's extensive work, not all researchers were convinced that DNA polymerase I was the enzyme that replicates DNA within cells ( in vivo ).
The primary reservations involved observations that the in vitro rate of synthesis was much slower than expected in vivo , that the enzyme was much more effective replicating single stranded DNA than double stranded DNA, and that the enzyme appeared to be able to degrade DNA as well as to synthesize it. 

Faced with the uncertainty of the true cellular function of DNA polymerase I, Kornberg pursued another approach.
He reasoned that if the enzyme could be used to synthesize biologically active DNA in vitro , then DNA polymerase I must be the major catalyzing force for DNA synthesis within the cell.
The term biological activity means that the DNA synthesized is capable of supporting metabolic activities and directing reproduction of the organism from which it was originally duplicated.

In 1967, Mehran Goulian, Kornberg, and Robert Sinsheimer showed that the DNA of the small bacteriophage oX174 could be completely copied by DNA polymerase I in vitro , and that the new product could be isolated and used to successfully transfect E. coli protoplasts.
Recall that in Chapter 10 we introduced the process of transfection, where viral DNA infects bacterial protoplasts.
This process produced mature phages from the synthetic DNA, thus demonstrating biological activity!
The ingenious experimental design is outlined in Figure 11.11.

The phage oX174 provided an ideal experimental system because it contains a very small (5386 nucleotides), circular, single-stranded DNA molecule as its genetic material.
Because the molecule is a closed circle, the experiment depended on the isolation of a second enzyme, DNA ligase (also called the polynucleotide joining enzyme), which joins the two ends of the linear molecule following replication.

Figure 11.0

A replication fork formed following the initiation of DNA synthesis

Figure 11.1

General model of semiconservative replication of DNA

Figure 11.2

Results of two rounds of replication of DNA for each of the three possible modes of replication

Each round of synthesis is shown in a different color.

Figure 11.3

The Meselson-Stahl experiement 

Figure 11.4

The expected results of two generations of semiconservative replication in the Meselson-Stahl experiment

Figure 11.5

Depiction of the experiment by Taylor, Woods, and Hughes demonstrating the semiconservative mode of replication of DNA in root tips of Vicia faba 

The plant is shown in the top photograph. (a)
An unlabeted chromatid proceeds through the cell cycle in the presence of 3H-thymidine.
As it enters mitosis, both sister chromatids of the chomosome are labeled, as shown by autoradiography After a second generation of replication, this time in the absence of 3H-thymidine, only one chromatid of each chromosome is expected to be surrounded by grains (b).
Except where a reciprocal exchange has occurred between sister chromatids (c), the expectation was upheld.
The micrographs are of the actual autoradiograms obtained in the experiment.

Figure 11.6

Bidirectional replication of the E. coli chromosome 

The arrows identify the advancing replication forks.
The micrograph is of a bacterial chromosome in the process of replication.

Figure 11.7

Transmission electron micrograph of human DNA from a HeLa cell, illustrating dual replication forks and the replication bubble that characterizes DNA replication within a single replicon

Figure 11.8

The chemical reaction catalyzed by DNA polymerase 1

During each step, a single nucleotide is added to the growing complement of the DNA template using a nucleoside triphosphate as the substrate.
The release of inorganic pyrophosphate drives the reaction energetically.

Figure 11.9

Demonstration of 5'-3"> synthesis of DNA

Figure 11.10

The theory of nearest-neighbor analysis

Initially, one of the four nucleotides (C) contains 32p in the 5'-phosphate group.
Following synthesis of a polynucleotide chain and enzymatic treatment with phosphodiesterase, the radioactive phosphate groups are transferred to the nearest neighbors (G and T).
Subsequent analysis reveals the percentage of time each of the four nucleotides (A, T C, and G) have become radioactive.

[5] dNTP designates the deoxyribose forms of the four nudeoside triphosphates; in a similar way, xxx refers to the monophosphate forms.

Storage and Expression of Genetic Information

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Genetic information, stored in DNA and transferred to RNA during the process of transcription, is present as three-letter codes.
Using four different letters, corresponding to the four ribonucleotides in RNA, the 64 triplet codons not only specify the 20 different amino acids found in proteins but also provide signals that initiate and terminate protein synthesis. 
This unique language is the basis of life as we know it.

In previous chapters we established that DNA is the genetic material and we explored the structure and replication of DNA. 
In this chapter we explore two additional aspects of molecular genetics.
First, we will discuss how DNA encodes genetic information.
Second, we will examine how this information is decoded during expression of genetic information. 
As we shall see, the elaborate system that provides the physical and chemical basis for the storage and expression of genetic information has the potential to produce a nearly endless variety of protein molecules.
To accomplish such synthesis, DNA of an active gene is first transcribed into RNA complement that is then translated into a protein.
The information that is stored in a sequence of deoxyribonucleotides in DNA is first transferred to the complementary sequence of ribonucleotides in RNA, which are then decoded as the RNA specifies the order of insertion of amino acids during protein synthesis.
Proteins, as the end products of various gene sequences, are responsible for the normal and mutant phenotypes of organisms. 

A fundamental question, then, is how an RNA molecule consisting of only four different types of ribonucleotides (A, U, C, and G) can specify 20 different amino acids.
This question poses an intriguing theoretical problem.
When ingenious analytical research was applied to this problem, he genetic code was deciphered.
It was established that the code is triplet in nature.
Code words, or codons, consisting of three ribonucleotides direct the insertion of amino acids into a polypeptide chain during its synthesis.

The process by which RNA molecules are synthesized on a DNA template is called transcription.
The ribonucleotide sequence of RNA is then capable of directing the process of translation. 
During translation, polypeptide chains-which mature into proteins-are synthesized.
Protein synthesis is dependent on a series of transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules that serve as adaptors between the codons of mRNA (messenger RNA) and the amino acids specified by them.
In addition, the process of translation occurs only in conjunction with an intricate cellular component, the ribosome.

The processes of transcription and translation are complex molecular events.

Like the replication of DNA, both rely heavily on base-pairing affinities between complementary nucleotides.
The initial transfer of stored information in DNA produces a molecule, usually mRNA, that is complementary to the nucleotide sequence of one of the two strands of the double helix.
Then, each triplet codon of mRNA, which is complementary to the anti-codon region of the tRNA that bears the corresponding amino acid, directs the sequential insertion of amino acids into a polypeptide chain. 

In this chapter we will describe in detail how the genetic code was deciphered and how gene expression occurs.
The work leading to these discoveries occurred most intensively in the late 1950s and early 1960s, one of the most exciting periods in the history of molecular genetics.
This research revealed the intricacies of the specific chemical language that serves as the basis of all life on Earth.

An Overview of the Genetic Code 

Before considering the various analytical approaches used n arriving at our current understanding of the genetic code, we shall provide a summary of the general features that characterize it:

1 The genetic code is written in linear form using the ribonucleotide bases that compose mRNA molecules as the letters.
The ribonucleotide sequence is, of course, derived from its complement in DNA.

2 Each word within the mRNA contains three letters.
Thus, the code is a triplet.
Called a codon, each group of three ribonucleotides specifies one amino acid.

3 The code is unambiguous, meaning that each triplet specifies only a single amino acid.

4 The code is degenerate, meaning that a given amino acid is specified by more than one triplet codon.
This is the case for 18 of the 20 amino acids.

5 The code is ordered.
Multiple codons specifying a given amino acid may be categorized together, most often varying by only the third base.

6 The code contains "start" and "stop" punctuation signals.
Certain triplets are necessary to initiate and to terminate translation.

7 No commas (or internal punctuation) are used in the code.
Thus, the code is said to be commaless.
Once translation of mRNA begins, the three ribonuclectides are read in turn, one after the other.

8 The code is nonoverlapping.
Once translation commences, any single ribonucleotide at a specific location within the mRNA is part of only one triplet.

9 The code is nearly universal.
With only minor exceptions, a single coding dictionary is used by almost all viruses, prokaryotes, and eukaryotes.


Early Thinking about the Code

Before it became clear that mRNA serves as an intermediate in transferring genetic information from DNA to proteins, it was thought that DNA itself might directly encode proteins during their synthesis.
Once mRNA was discovered, it was clear that even though genetic information is stored in DNA, the code that is translated into proteins resides in RNA.
The central question was how only four letters-the four nucleotides-could specify 20 words-the amino acids.

As to the size of the code, in the early 1960s Sidney Brenner argued on theoretical grounds that it must be a triplet since three-letter words represent the minimal use of four letters to specify 20 amino acids.
For example, four nucleotides, taken two at a time provide only 16 unique code words (42) Although a triplet code provides 64 words (43)-clearly more than the 20 needed-it is much simpler than a four-letter code, where 256 words (44) would be specified.

Brenner also argued that the code was nonoverlapping.
Assuming a triplet code, Brenner considered restrictions that might be placed on it if it were overlapping.
For example, he considered theoretical nucleotide sequences encoding a protein consisting of three amino acids.
In the nucleotide sequence GTACA, parts of the central triplet, TAC, are shared by the outer triplets, GTA and ACA, as shown below.
Brenner reasoned that if this were the case, then only certain amino acids should he found adjacent to the one encoded by the central triplet: 

For any given central amino acid, only 16 combinations (2) of "three amino acid" sequences (a tripeptide) are theoretically possible.

Therefore, Brenner concluded that if the code were overlapping, tripeptide sequences within proteins should be somewhat limited. 
Looking at the available amino acid sequences of proteins that had been studied, he failed to find such restrictions in tripeptide sequences.
For any central amino acid, many more than 16 different tripeptides were found.

A second major argument against an overlapping code involved the effect of a single nucleotide change characteristic of a point mutation.
With an overlapping code, two adjacent amino acids could be affected.
However, mutations in the genes coding for the protein coat of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), human hemoglobin, and the bacterial enzyme tryptophan synthetase invariably revealed only single amino acid changes.

The third argument against an overlapping code was presented by Francis Crick in 1957, when he predicted that DNA does not serve as a direct template for the formation of proteins.
Crick reasoned that any affinity between nucleotides and an amino acid would require hydrogen bonding.
Chemically, however, such specific affinities seemed unlikely.
Instead, Crick proposed that there must be an adaptor molecule that could covalently bind to the amino acid yet be capable of hydrogen bonding to a nucleotide sequence.
Because various adaptors would somehow have to overlap one another at nucleotide sites during translation, Crick reasoned that physical constraints would make the process overly complex and, perhaps, even inefficient during translation.
As we will see later in this chapter, Crick's prediction was correct; transfer RNA (tRNA) serves as the adaptor in protein synthesis.
And, the ribosome accommodates two tRNA molecules at a time during translation.

Crick's and Brenner's arguments, taken together, strongly suggested that during translation, the genetic code is nonoverlapping. 
Without exception, this concept has been upheld.

The Code: Further Developments

Between 1958 and 1960, information related to the genetic code continued to accumulate.
In addition to his adaptor proposal, Crick hypothesized, on the basis of genetic evidence, that the code is commaless; that is, he believed no internal punctuation occurs along the reading frame.
Crick also speculated that only 20 of the 64 possible triplets specify an amino acid and that the remaining 44 carry no coding assignment. 

At the time, however, there was as yet no experimental evidence that the code was indeed a triplet; nor had the concept of messenger RNA, as an intermediate between DNA and protein, been established.
Because ribosomes had already been identified, the current thinking was that information in DNA is transferred in the nucleus to the RNA of the ribosome, which serves as the template for protein synthesis in the cytoplasm.

This concept soon became untenable as accumulating evidence demonstrated that the template intermediate was unstable.
The RNA of ribosomes, on the other hand, was found to be extremely stable.
As a result, in 1961 Franois Jacob and Jacques Monod postulated the existence of messenger RNA (mRNA). 
The scene was thus set to demonstrate the triplet nature of the genetic code, as contained in the intermediate mRNA, and to decipher the specific codon assignments.

Many questions beyond the triplet assignments also remained. 
Are there start-stop punctuation signals?
Is the code ambiguous, with one triplet specifying more than one amino acid?
Was Crick wrong with respect to the 44 "blank" codes?
That is, is the code degenerate, with more than one triplet assignment for many, if not all, amino acids?
Is the code universal?
As we shall see, these and other questions were answered in the next decade.

The Study of Frameshift Mutations 

Before discussing the experimentation in which specific codon assignments were deciphered, we will consider the ingenious experimental work of Crick, Leslie Barnett, Brenner, and R. J. Watts-Tobin.
Their work represented the first solid evidence for the triplet nature of the code.

In their work, these researchers induced insertion and deletion mutations in the B cistron of the r II locus of phage T4.
The B cistron is one of two functional sites in this locus that, in mutant form, causes rapid lysis and distinctive plaques.
Mutants in the rII locus will successfully infect strain B of E. coli but cannot reproduce on a separate strain of E. coli , designated K12.
Crick and his colleagues used the acridine dye proflavin to induce mutations (see Figure 14.12, p. 40j).
This mutagenic agent intercalates within the double helix of DNA, often causing, the insertion or the deletion of one or more nucleotides during replication.
As shown in Figure 12.1(a), an insertion of a single nucleotide causes the frame of reading to shift, changing the specific sequence of all subsequent triplets to the right of the insertion.
Upon translation, the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein will be altered.
Such mutations are called frameshifts. 
When they are present at the rll locus, T4 will not reproduce on E. coli K12.

Crick and colleagues reasoned that if phages with these induced mutations were treated again with proflavin, still other insertions or deletions would occur.
A second change might result in a revertant phage, which would behave like wild type and successfully infect E. coli K12.

For example, if the original mutant contained an insertion (+), a second event causing a deletion (-) close to the insertion would restore the original reading frame.
In the same way, an event resulting in an insertion (+) might correct an original deletion (-).

In studying many mutations of this type, these researchers were able to compare various mutant combinations together within the same DNA sequence.
They found that various combinations of one (+) and one (-) indeed caused reversion to wild-type behavior. 
Still other observations shed light on the number of nucleotides constituting the genetic code.
When two (+)s were together or when two (-)s were together, the correct reading frame was not reestablished.
This argued against a doublet (two-letter) code.
However, when three (+)s [Figure 12.1(b)] or three (-)s were present together, the original frame was reestablished. 
These observations strongly supported the triplet nature of the code.

These data further suggested that the code is degenerate, which was contrary to Crick's earlier proposal.
A degenerate code is one in which more than one codon specifies the same amino acid.
The reasoning leading to this conclusion is as follows. 
In the cases where wild-type function is restored, i.e., (+) and (-), (+++) and (---), the original frame of reading is also restored.
However, there may be numerous triplets between the various additions and deletions that would still be out of frame.
If 44 of the 64 possible triplets were blank and did not specify an amino acid, one of these so-called non-sense triplets would very likely occur in the length of nucleotides still out of frame.
If a nonsense code were encountered during protein synthesis, it was reasoned that the process would stop or be terminated at that point.
If so, the product of the r II-B locus would not be made, and restoration would not occur.
Because the various mutant combinations were able to reproduce on E. coli K12, Crick and his colleagues concluded that, in all likelihood, most if not all of the remaining 44 codes were not blank.
It follows that the genetic code is degenerate. 
As we shall see, this reasoning proved to be correct. 

Deciphering the Code: Initial Studies 

In 1961 Marshall Nirenberg and J. Heinrich Matthaei published results characterizing the first specific coding sequences.
These results served as a cornerstone for the complete analysis of the genetic code.
Their success was dependent on the use of two experimental tools:
an in vitro (cell-free) protein-synthesizing system, and an enzime, polynucleotide phosphorylase, which allowed the production of synthetic mRNAs.
These mRNAs served as templates for polypeptide synthesis in the cell-free system.

In the cell-free system, amino acids can be incorporated into polypeptide chains.
This in vitro mixture, as might be expected, must contain the essential factors for protein synthesis in the cell:
ribosomes, tRNAs, amino acids, and other molecules essential to translation.
In order to follow (or trace) protein synthesis, one or more of the amino acids must be radioactive. 
Finally, an mRNA must be added, which serves as the template to be translated.

In 1961 mRNA had yet to be isolated.
However, the use of the enzyme polynucleotide phosphorylase allowed artificial synthesis of RNA templates, which could be added to the cell-free system.
This enzyme, isolated from bacteria, catalyzes the reaction shown in Figure 12.2.
Discovered in 1955 by Marianne Grunberg-Manago and Severo Ochoa, the enzyme functions metabolically in bacterial cells to degrade RNA.
However, in vitro , with high concentrations of ribonucleoside diphosphates, the reaction can be "forced" in the opposite direction to synthesize RNA, as illustrated. 

In contrast to RNA polymerase, polynucleotide phosphorylase requires no DNA template.
As a result, each addition of a ribonucleotide is random, based on the relative concentration of the four ribonucleoside diphosphates added to the reaction mixtures.
The probability of insertion of a specific ribonucleotide is proportional to the availability of that molecule, relative to other available ribonucleotides.
This point is absolutely critical to understanding the work of Nirenberg and others in the ensuing discussion.

Taken together, the cell-free system for protein synthesis and the availability of synthetic mRNAs provided a means of deciphering the ribonucleotide composition of various triplets encoding specific amino acids.

Nirenberg and Matthaeis Homopolymer Codes

In their initial experiments, Nirenberg and Matthaei synthesized RNA homopolymers, each consisting of only one type of ribonocleotide. 
Therefore, the mRNA added to the in vitro system was either UUUUUU....
AAAAAA..., CCCCCC..., or GGGGGG....
In testing each mRNA, they were able to determine which, if any, amino acids were incorporated into newly synthesized proteins.
The researchers determined this by labeling one of the 20 amino acids added to the in vitro system and conducting a series of experiments, each with a different amino acid made radioactive.

For example, consider one of the initial experiments, where 14C-phenylalanine was used (Table 12.1).
From these and related experiments, Nirenberg and Matthaei concluded that the message poly U (polyuridylic acid) directs the incorporation of only phenylalanine into the homopolymer polyphenylalanine. 

Assuming a triplet code they had determined the first specific codon assignment UUU codes for phenylalanine.

In the same way, they quickly found that AAA codes for lysine and CCC codes for proline.
Poly G did not serve as an adequate template, probably because the molecule folds back on itself.
Thus, the assignment for GGG had to await other approaches.
Note that the specific triplet codon assignments were possible only because of the use of homopolymers. 
This method yields only the composition of triplets, not the sequence.
However, three U's, C's, or As can have only one possible sequence (i.e., UUU, CCC, and AAA).

Figure 12.0

Electron micrograph visualizing the process of transcription

Figure 12.1

Schematic diagram of the effect of frameshift mutations on a DNA sequence repeating the triplet sequence GAG

In part (a) the insertion of a single nucleotide has shifted all subsequent reading frames.
In part (b) the insertion of three nucleotides changes only two reading frames, but all remaining frames are retained in their original sequence. 

Figure 12.2

The reaction catalyzed by the enzyme polynucleotide phosphorylase

Note that the equilibrium of the reaction favors the degradation of RNA but can be "forced" in the direction favoring synthesis.

Proteins:

The End Product of Genetic Expression

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

The end products of most gene expression are polypeptide chains.
They achieve a three-dimensional conformation that is based on their primary amino acid sequences, and they often interact with other such chains to create functional protein molecules.
The function of any protein is closely tied to its structure, which can be disrupted by mutation, leading to a distinctive phenotypic effect.

In Chapter 12 we established that there is a genetic code that stores information in the form of triplet nucleotides in DNA, and that this information can be expressed through the orderly processes of transcription and translation.

The final product of gene expression, in almost all instances, is a polypeptide chain consisting of a linear series of amino acids whose sequence has been prescribed by the genetic code. 
In this chapter we will review the evidence that confirmed that proteins are the end products of genes, and we will then discuss briefly the various levels of protein structure, diversity, and function.
This information provides an important foundation in our understanding of how mutations, which arise in DNA, can result in the diverse phenotypic effects observed in organisms. 

Garrod and Bateson:

Inborn Errors of Metabolism

The first insight into the role of proteins in genetic processes was provided by observations made by Sir Archibald Garrod and William Bateson early in this century.
Garrod was born into an English family of medical scientists.
His father was a physician with a strong interest in the chemical basis of rheumatoid arthritis, and his eldest brother was a leading zoologist in London.

It is not surprising, then, that as a practicing physician, Garrod became interested in several human disorders that seemed to be inherited.
Although he also studied albinism and cystinuria, we will describe his investigation of the disorder alkaptonuria.
Individuals afflicted with this disorder cannot metabolize the alkapton 2,5-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, also known as homogentisic acid.
As a result, an important metabolic pathway (Figure 13.1) is blocked.
Homogentisic acid accumulates in cells and tissues and is excreted in the urine.
The molecule's oxidation products are black and easily detectable in the diapers of newborns.
The products tend to accumulate in cartilaginous areas, causing a darkening of the ears and nose.
In joints, this deposition leads to a benign arthritic condition.
This rare disease is not serious, but it persists throughout an individual's life. 

Garrod studied alkaptonuria by increasing dietary protein or adding to the diet the amino acids phenylalanine or tyrosine, both of which are chemically related to homogentisic acid.
Under such conditions, homogentisic acid levels increase in the urine of alkaptonurics but not in unaffected individuals. 
Garrod concluded that normal individuals can break down, or catabolize, this alkapton but that afflicted individuals cannot. 
By studying the patterns of inheritance of the disorder, Garrod further concluded that alkaptonuria was inherited as a simple recessive trait.

On the basis of these conclusions, Garrod hypothesized that the hereditary information controls chemical reactions in the body and that the inherited disorders he studied are the result of alternative modes of metabolism.
While genes and enzymes were not familiar terms during Garrod's time, he used the corresponding concepts of unit factors and ferments. 
Garrod published his initial observations in 1902.

Only a few geneticists, including Bateson, were familiar with or referred to Garrod's work.
Garrod's ideas fit nicely with Bateson's belief that inherited conditions were caused by the lack of some critical substance.
In 1909, Bateson published Mendel's Principles of Heredity, in which he linked ferments with heredity.
However, for almost 30 years, most geneticists failed to see the relationship between genes and enzymes.
Garrod and Bateson, like Mendel, were ahead of their time.

Phenylketonuria

Described first in 1934, phenylketonuria (PKU) can result in mental retardation and is inherited as an autosomal recessive disease.
Afflicted individuals have a different step blocked in the metabolic pathway just discussed.
They are unable to convert the amino acid phenylalanine to the amino acid tyrosine (see Figure 13.1).
These molecules differ by only a single hydroxyl group (-OH), present in tyrosine, but absent in phenylalanine. 
The reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which is inactive in affected individuals and active at about a 30 percent level in heterozygotes.
The enzyme functions in the liver.

While the normal blood level of phenylalanine is about 1 mg/100 ml, phenylketonurics show a level as high as 50 mg/100 ml.

As phenylalanine accumulates, it may be converted to phenylpyruvic acid and, subsequently, other derivatives.
These are less efficiently resorbed by the kidney and tend to spill into the urine more quickly than phenylalanine.
Both phenylalanine and derivatives enter the cerebrospinal fluid, resulting in elevated levels in the brain.
The presence of these substances during early development is thought to cause mental retardation. 

As a result of early detection based on PKU screening of newborns, retardation can be prevented.
When the condition is detected in the analysis of an infant's blood, a strict dietary regimen is instituted.
A low phenylalanine diet can reduce such by-products as phenylpyruvic acid, and abnormalities characterizing the disease can be diminished.
Screening of newborns occurs routinely in almost every state in this country Phenylketonuria occurs in approximately 1 in 11,000 births.

Knowledge of inherited metabolic disorders such as alkaptonuria and phenylketonuria has caused a revolution in medical thinking and practice.
No longer is human disease attributed solely to the action of invading microorganisms, viruses, or parasites. 
We know now that literally thousands of abnormal physiological conditions are caused by errors in metabolism that are the result of mutant genes.
These human biochemical disorders are far-ranging and include all classes of organic biomolecules.

The One-Gene:One-Enzyme Hypothesis

In two separate investigations beginning in 1933, George Beadle was to provide the first convincing experimental evidence that genes are directly responsible for the synthesis of enzymes. 
The first investigation, conducted in collaboration with Boris Ephrussi, involved Drosophila eye pigments.
Encouraged by these findings, Beadle then joined with Edward Tatum to investigate nutritional mutations in the pink bread mold Neurospora crassa .
This investigation led to the one-gene:one-enzyme hypothesis.

Beadle and Ephrussi:

Drosophila Eye Pigments

The studies of Beadle and Ephrussi involved imaginal disks in Drosophila .
These are embryonic cells found in the larvae of insects.
Upon metamorphosis, these cells differentiate into a variety of adult structures such as eves, legs, antennae, and genital structures. 
Beadle and Ephrussi found that if an imaginal disk were removed from one larva and transplanted into the abdomen of another, that disk would differentiate during metamorphosis and its corresponding adult structure could be recovered from the abdomen of the adult fly.
For example, if an eye disk were transplanted, it would develop into an eye-like structure that could be recovered and analyzed.

These investigators wondered whether a mutant eye disk, transplanted into a wild-type larva, would be altered by its new environment.
Would it appear normally pigmented, or would it develop its characteristic mutant color?
The first mutant used was vermilion , an X-linked, bright red eye color mutation.
Mutant development was reversed!
The vermilion (v) eye disk was altered to produce a normally pigmented wild-type eye.
The normal wild-type color is brick red, produced as a combination of brown and bright red pigments.
The vermilion mutant makes the bright red pigment, but lacks the brown pigment, indicating that its synthesis is inhibited.
However, in the wild-type abdomen, synthesis of brown pigment also occurred normally in the mutant disk, producing wild-type color.

Beadle and Ephrussi then performed similar experimentation with 25 other mutants.
Only one, cinnabar (cn), another bright red eye mutation missing the brown pigment, behaved like vermilion when transplanted; it developed a normal eye color.
The remaining 24 behaved "autonomously" by exhibiting their respective mutant color when differentiated.

The two researchers concluded that the flies with either vermilion or cinnabar phenotypes have mutant eyes because of the absence of some diffusible substance in their disks during development.
Because this substance is diffusible, it was present in the wild-type abdomen and thus accessible to the transplanted v or cn disks.
Under these conditions, it would enable full pigment production in the mutant transplants.

However, in the case of the 24 mutations that developed autonomously, the substance that might have permitted normal pigment production was not diffusible but confined to the host cells forming the eye.
Thus, no "correction" was observed. 

Beadle and Ephrussi then asked whether the same substance was lacking in both the vermilion and cinnabar mutants.
To answer this question, they transplanted vermilion eye disks into cinnabar larvae, and vice versa.
What they found was intriguing.
The v disks were "cured" or converted to wild-type color in Cn abdomens, but cinnabar disks developed autonomously in vermilion hosts and retained their mutant phenotype.
These experiments are diagrammed in Figure 13.2.

To explain such results, the researchers proposed that two sequential biochemical reactions are involved in normal synthesis of the brown pigment.
One is inactive in flies with the vermilion mutation, and the other is inactive in flies with the cinnabar mutation.
Each reaction produces a product that is diffusible in the tissues of wild type.
As shown in Figure 13.2, the substance produced under the direction of the wild-type allele of the vermilion locus (substance Y) occurs first in the pathway. 
It is then converted to a second substance (Z) in the pathway.
This conversion is controlled by the wild-type allele of the cinnabar locus.

Knowledge of the order of this pathway allows us to understand the results of the reciprocal transplantations.
Consider first the vermilion (v) disk in the cinnabar (cn) host.
The vermilion disk lacks the v+ enzyme but has the cn + enzyme.
As the host, the cinnabar tissue can make substance Y because it has the wild-type allele of the vermilion gene (v+).

Substance Y is diffusible and enters the vermilion disk where the cn:
enzyme converts it to substance Z. Substance Z is then converted to the brown pigment, restoring the wild-type eye color.

Now consider the cinnabar disk in the vermilion host.
The host tissue, lacking the v+ gene, cannot make the z + enzyme, and so cannot make substance Y.
Even though the cn+ enzyme is present, because no Y is available to be converted to Z, no Z is produced either.
As a result, the transplanted cn disk is still blocked.
It can make substance Y but cannot complete the transition through Z to the brown pigment.
Thus, it remains bright red!

Within a few years, other researchers had investigated the biochemical pathway leading to the brown xanthommatin pigment in Drosophila .
As shown in Figure 13.3, the brown pigment is a derivative of the amino acid tryptophan.
The reactions controlled by the specific enzymes altered by the vermilion and cinnabar mutations have been identified. 
Other autosomal recessive mutations, including scarlet- and cardinal, have also been studied and shown to affect enzymes in this pathway Most relevant to our discussion was he confirmation in the 19405 that mutant genes controlling distinctive morphological phenotypes were linked directly to biochemical "errors," most likely due to a lack of enzyme function.

Beadle and Tatum:

Neurospora Mutants

In the early 1940s, Beadle and Tatum chose to work with the fungus Neurospora crassa because much was known about its biochemistry, and mutations could be induced and isolated with relative ease.
By inducing mutations, they produced strains that had genetic blocks of reactions essential to the growth of the organism.

Beadle and Tatum knew that Neurospora could manufacture nearly everything necessary for normal development.
For example, using rudimentary carbon and nitrogen sources, this organism can synthesize 9 water-soluble vitamins, 20 amino acids, numerous carotenoid pigments, and purines and pyrimidines.
Beadle and Tatum irradiated asexual conidia (spores) with X-rays to increase the frequency of mutations and allowed them to be grown on "complete" medium containing all necessary growth factors (vitamins, amino acids, etc.).
Under such growth conditions, a mutant strain that would be unable to grow on minimal medium would be able to grow in the enriched complete medium by virtue of supplements present.
All cultures were then transferred to minimal medium.
If growth occurred on minimal medium, the organisms were able to synthesize all necessary growth factors themselves, and it was concluded that the culture did not contain a mutation.
If no growth occurred, then it contained a nutritional mutation, and the only task remaining was to determine its type.
Both cases are illustrated in Figure 1 3.4(a).

Many thousands of individual spores derived by this procedure were isolated and grown on complete medium.
In subsequent tests on minimal medium, many cultures failed to grow, indicating that a nutritional mutation had been induced.
To identify the mutant type, the mutant strains were tested on a series of different minimal media [Figure 13.4(b) and (c)], each containing groups of supplements, and subsequently on single vitamins, amino acids, purines, or pyrimidines until one specific supplement that permitted growth was found.

Beadle and Tatum reasoned that the supplement that restores growth is the molecule that the mutant strain could not synthesize. 

The first mutant strain isolated required vitamin B-6 (pyridoxine) in the medium, and the second one required vitamin B-1 (thiamine). 
Using the same procedure, Beadle and Tatum eventually isolated and studied hundreds of mutants deficient in the ability to synthesize other vitamins, amino acids, or other substances. 

The findings derived from testing over 80,000 spores convinced Beadle and Tatum that genetics and biochemistry have much in common.
It seemed likely that each nutritional mutation caused the loss of the enzymatic activity that facilitates an essential reaction in wild-type organisms.
It also appeared that a mutation could be found for nearly any enzymatically controlled reaction.
Beadle and Tatum had thus provided sound experimental evidence for the hypothesis that one gene specifies one enzyme, an idea alluded to over 30 years earlier by Garrod and Bateson. 
With modifications, this concept was to become a major principle of genetics.

Genes and Enzymes:

Analysis of Biochemical Pathways

The one-gene:one-enzyme concept and its attendant methods have been used over the years to work out many details of metabolism in: Neurospora , Escherichia coli , and a number of other microorganisms. 
One of the first metabolic pathways to be investigated in detail was that leading to the synthesis of the amino acid arginine in Neurospora . 
By studying seven mutant strains, each requiring arginine for growth (arg-), Adrian Srb and Norman Horowitz were able to ascertain a partial biochemical pathway that leads to the synthesis of this molecule.
The rationale followed in their work illustrates how genetic analysis can be used to establish biochemical information.

Srb and Horowitz tested each mutant strain's ability to reestablish growth if either citrulline or ornithine, two compounds with close chemical similarity to arginine, was used as a supplement to minimal medium.
If either was able to substitute for arginine, they reasoned that it must be involved in the biosynthetic pathway of arginine.
They found that bath molecules could be substituted in one or more strains.

Of the seven mutant strains, four of them (arg 4-7) grew if supplied with either citrulline, ornithine, or arginine.
Two of them (arg 2 and 3) grew if supplied with citrulline or arginine.
One strain (arg 1) would grow only if arginine were supplied.
Neither citrulline nor ornithine could substitute for it.
From these experimental observations, the following pathway and metabolic blocks for each mutation were deduced:

The reasoning supporting these conclusions is based on the following logic.
If mutants arg 4 through 7 can grow regardless of which of the three molecules is supplied as a supplement to minimal medium, the mutations preventing growth must cause a metabolic block that occurs prior to the involvement of ornithine, citrulline, or arginine in the pathway.
When any one of these three molecules is added, its presence bypasses the block. 
As a result, it can be concluded that both citrulline and ornithine are involved in the biosynthesis of arginine.

However, the sequence of their participation in the pathway cannot be determined on the basis of these data.

On the other hand, the arg 2 and 3 mutations grow if supplied citrulline but not if they are supplied with only ornithine. 
Therefore, ornithine must occur in the pathway prior to the block.
Its presence will not overcome the block. 

Citrulline, however, does overcome the block, so it must be involved beyond the point of blockage.
Therefore, t he conversion of ornithine to citrulline represents the correct sequence in the pathway.

Finally, it can be concluded that arg 1 represents a mutation preventing the conversion of citrulline to arginine.
Neither ornithine nor citrolline can overcome the metabolic block because both participate earlier in the pathway.

Taken together, these reasons support the sequence of biosynthesis outlined here.
Ever since Srb and Horowitzs work in 1944, the detailed pathway has been worked out and the enzymes controlling each step characterized.
The metabolic pathway is shown in Figure 13.5.

The concept of one-gene one-enzyme developed in the early 1940s was not accepted immediately by all geneticists.
This is not surprising, because it was not yet clear how mutant enzymes could cause variation in many phenotypic traits.
For example, Drosophila mutants demonstrated altered eye size, wing shape, wing vein pattern, and so on.
Plants exhibited mutant varieties of seed texture, height, and fruit size.
How an inactive, mutant enzyime could result in such phenotypes was puzzling to many geneticists.

Another reason for their reluctance to accept this concept was the paucity of information then available in molecular genetics. 
It was not until 1944 that Avery, MacLeod, and MacCarty showed DNA to be the transforming factor and not until the early 1950s that most geneticists believed that DNA serves as the genetic material (see Chapter 10).
However, by that time, the evidence was overwhelming in support of the concept of enzymes as gene products, which was accepted as valid.

Nevertheless, the question of how DNA specifies the structure of enzymes remained unanswered at that time.

Figure 13.0

Collagen fibers, the most abundant protein in vertebrate organisms

Figure 13.1

Metabolic pathway involving phenylalanine and tyrosine

Various metabolic blocks resulting from mutations lead to the disorders phenylketonuria, alkaptonuria, albinism, and tyrosinemia.

Figure 13.2

Beadle and Ephrussi">s transplantation experiments involving Drosophila imaginal disks that develop into eyes

A mutant disk, transplanted into a wild-type larval abdomen, either develops autonomously, resulting in a mutant eye color, or the mutation is "cured" and normal eye color results, as illustrated in (a) and (b), respectively.
When a vermilion disk is transplanted into a cinnabar host (c), normal wild-type eye color develops in the transplanted disk.
The reciprocal experiment (d) results in autonomous development of the mutant eye color in the transplanted disk. 
On the basis of these results, the researchers concluded that the biosynthetic step controlled by the v+ gene product occurs prior to that controlled by the cn+ gene product within the same pathway.

Figure 13.3

The biosynthetic pathway leading to the conversion of tryptophan to the brown eye pigment xanthommatin 

Three different mutant blocks are shown, each interrupting synthesis at a different place in the pathway.
In the absence of xanthommatin, all three mutations, when homozygous, result in the identical phenotype, bright red eyes.

Figure 13.4

Induction, isolation, and characterization of a nutritional auxotrophic mutation in Neuraspora

In (a), most conidia are not affected, but one conidium (shown in red) contains such a mutation.
In (b) and (c), the precise nature of the mutation is determined to involve the biosynthesis of tyrosine.

Gene Mutation, DNA Repair, and Transposable Elements

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Aside from chromosomal mutations, the major basis of diversity among organisms, even those that are closely related, is variation at the level of the gene.
The origins of such variation are gene mutation, whereby coding sequences are altered as a result of the substitution, addition, or deletion of one or more bases within those sequences.
Relocation of mobile genetic elements within the genome also disrupts normal expression of genes, creating mutations.

Fortunately, elaborate mechanisms have evolved to repair various errors and lesions within DNA.
Gene mutations are the working tools of the geneticists and the raw material upon which evolution relies.

In our earlier discussion of DNA as the genetic material (Chapter 10), we defined the four characteristics or functions ascribed to the genetic information replication storage, expression, and variation by mutation.
In a sense, mutation is a failure to store the genetic information faithfully.
If a change occurs in the stored information, it may be reflected in the expression of that information and will be propagated by replication. 
Historically, the term mutation includes both chromosomal changes and changes within single genes.

We have discussed the former alterations in Chapter 9, referring to them collectively as chromosomal mutations or chromosomal aberrations.
In this chapter we will be concerned with the so-called gene mutations.
As we will see, a change may be a simple substitution of a single nucleotide or may involve the addition or deletion of one or more nucleotides within the normal sequence of DNA.

The term mutation was coined in 1901 by Hugo De-Vries to explain the variation he observed in crosses involving the evening primrose, Oenothera lamarckiana .
Most of the variation was actually due to multiple translocations, but two cases were subsequently shown to be caused by gene mutation.
As the studies of mutations progressed, it soon became clear that gene mutations serve as the source of most alleles and thus are the origin of much of the existing genetic variability within populations.
As new alleles arise, they constitute the raw material to be tested by the evolutionary process of natural selection, which will determine whether they are detrimental neutral, or beneficial.

Mutations provide the basis for genetic studies.
The resulting phenotypic variability allows the geneticist to study the genes that control the traits that have been modified. 
In this regard, mutations serve as identifying "markers" of genes so that they may be followed during their transmission from parents to offspring.
Without the phenotypic variability that mutations provide, genetic analysis would be impossible to conduct.
For example, if all pea plants displayed a uniform phenotype, Mendel would have had no basis for his experimentation. 
Because of the importance of mutations, great attention has been given to their origin, induction, and classification. 

Certain organisms lend themselves to induction of mutations that can be easily detected and studied throughout reasonably short life cycles.
Viruses, bacteria, fungi, fruit flies, certain plants, and mice fit these criteria to various degrees. 
Thus, these organisms have often been used in studying mutations and mutagenesis, and through other studies they have also contributed to more general aspects of genetic knowledge. 

Once we have completed our presentation of mutation, we will turn our attention to two related topics:
DNA repair and transposable genetic elements.

These topics are logical extensions of our consideration of gene mutation.

Repair processes serve to counteract mutation.
Transposable elements often disrupt the normal structure of the gene and therefore create mutations.

Random versus Adaptive Mutations 

Although it was known well before 1943 that pure cultures of bacteria could give rise to small numbers of cells exhibiting heritable variation, particularly with respect to survival under different environmental conditions, the source of t-he variation was hotly debated.
The majority of bacteriologists believed that environmental factors induced changes in certain bacteria that led to their survival or adaptation to the new conditions. 
For example, strains of Escherichia coli are known to be sensitive to infection by the bacteriophage T1.
Infection by the bacteriophage leads to the reproduction of the virus at the expense of the bacterial cell, which is lysed or destroyed (see Figure 10.5).
If a plate of E. coli is homogeneously sprayed with T1, almost all cells are lysed.

Rare E. coli cells, however survive infection and are not lysed.
If these cells are isolated and established in pure culture, all descendants are resistant to T1 infection.
The adaptation hypothesis, put forth to explain this type of observation, implied that the interaction of the phage and bacterium was essential to the acquisition of immunity.
In other words, the phage had somehow "induced" resistance in the bacteria.

The occurrence of random (or spontaneous) mutations provided an alternative model to explain the origin of T1 resistance in E. coli .
In 1943, Salvador Luria and Max Delbruck presented the first direct evidence that mutation in bacteria occurs randomly within the chromosome of bacteria.
That is, there is no way of predicting when or where in the chromosome mutation will occur.
This experiment marked the initiation of modern bacterial genetic study.

The Luria-Delbruck Fluctuation Test 

In a beautiful example of analytical and theoretical work, Luria and Delbruck carried out experiments to differentiate between the adaptation and random mutation hypotheses.
In their work, they used the E. coli T1 systems just described.
Many small individual liquid cultures of page-sensitive E. coli were grown up.

Then, numerous aliquots from each culture were added to Petri dishes containing agar medium to which T1 bacteriophages had been previously added.
Following incubation, each plate was scored for the number of phage-resistant bacterial colonies.
This was easy to ascertain because only mutant cells were not lysed, and they survived to be counted.
The precise number of total bacteria added to each plate prior to incubation was also determined so that quantitative data could be obtained.

The experimental rationale for distinguishing between the two hypotheses was as follows:

1.
Adaptation:
Every bacterium has a small but constant probability of acquiring resistance as a result of contact with the phages on the Petri dish.

Therefore, the number of resistant cells will depend only on the number of bacteria and phages added to each plate.
The final results should be independent of all other experimental conditions.

The adaptation hypothesis predicts, therefore, that if a constant number of bacteria and phages is used for each culture and if incubation time is constant' then little fluctuation should be noted in the number of resistant cells on different plates, and from experiment to experiment.

2.
Random Mutation:
On the other hand, if resistance is acquired as a result of mutations that occur randomly, resistance will occur at a low rate during the incubation in liquid medium prior to plating, before any contact with phage occurs.
When mutations occur early during incubation, subsequent reproduction of the mutant bacteria will, relatively speaking, produce large numbers of resistant cells.
When mutations occur relatively late during incubation, far fewer resistant cells will be present.

The random mutation hypothesis predicts, therefore, that significant fluctuation in the number of resistant cells will be observed from experiment to experiment, reflecting the various times when most spontaneous mutations occurred while in liquid culture.

Table 14.1 shows a representative set of data from the Luria-Delbruck experiments.
The middle column shows the number of mutants recovered from a series of aliquots derived from one large individual liquid culture.
In a large culture, experimental differences are evened out because the culture is constantly mixed.
As a result, these data serve as a control because the number in each aliquot should be nearly identical. 
As predicted, little fluctuation is observed.
The right-hand column, however, shows the number of resistant mutants recovered from a single aliquot from each of 10 independent liquid cultures.
The amount of fluctuation in the data will support only one of the two alternative hypotheses.
For this reason, the experiment has been designated the fluctuation test.
A great fluctuation is observed between cultures, thus supporting the random nature of mutation.
Fluctuation is measured by the amount of variance, a statistical calculation. 

Table 14.1

The Luria-Delbruck Experiment Demonstrating That Spontaneous Mutations Are the Source of Phage-Resistant Bacteria

Sample No.
Same Culture (Control).
Different Cultures.


Mean.
16.7.
26.2.


Variance.
15.0.
2178.0.


The conclusion reached in the Luria-Delbruck experiment that random mutations account for inherited variation in bacteria received further support from other experimentation.
Nevertheless, until the 1950s, staunch supporters of the adaptation theory were not convinced.

Adaptive Mutation in Bacteria

Although the concept of random mutation in viruses, bacteria, and even higher organisms is no longer disputed, the possibility that organisms such as bacteria might also be capable of "selecting" a specific set of mutations occurring as a result of environmental pressures has long intrigued geneticists.
Two independent investigations, published in 1988 by John Cairns and Barry Hall and their colleagues, have provided preliminary evidence that this might be the case.
While the findings presented below are still controversial, this general topic is the subject of a current investigation of potentially great significance.

Cairns devised an experimental protocol that improves on that used in the fluctuation test of Luria and Delbruck, discussed above.
The procedures were designed to detect nonrandom mutations arising in response to factors in the environment in which bacteria are cultured.
The results of this work suggest that some bacteria may select mutations that are "adaptive" to the environment.

Instead of using the characteristic of phage T1 resistance, where the only surviving cells are those that have mutated, the Cairns work involved a strain of bacteria that contained a lactose mutation (lac-).
Such bacteria cannot use lactose as a carbon source. (See the discussion of the lac operon in Chapter 18.) Cells first were grown in a rich liquid medium that provided an adequate car-bon source other than lactose.
Thus, the lac-cells as well as any spontaneous lac+ mutants were able to grow and reproduce quite well.
This gene was subsequently followed by plating aliquots of cells on Petri plates containing minimal medium to which lactose had been added.
The lac-cells, present in the vast majority, will survive on the plates, but because they lack a carbon source that they can metabolize, they cannot proliferate and form colonies.
On the other hand, cells that have mutated to lac+, whether in the original liquid culture or as they sit on the plate, will form colonies and be detected.
Those cells that have not mutated to lac+ in liquid medium have the opportunity to do so after they are plated, and they may also be detected, since they will then form colonies.
This is the major experimental difference between this approach and that of Luria and Delbruck some 45 years earlier.

Using a slightly more sophisticated mathematical analysis than Luria and Delbruck, Cairns attempted to identify the same sort of "fluctuation," or the lack of it, as an indication of either random (spontaneous) or adaptive mutations, respectively. 
Cairns found both types of data!
The composite distribution was calculated for the case in which both spontaneous mutations occurred in the liquid cultures at random times (cresting "fluctuation") and directed mutations arose as a response to the presence of lactose on the Petri plates.
Indeed, such a composite distribution was observed.

But, how could it be proved that, in fact, the elevated frequency of mutations occurred on the plates in response to lactose?
To answer this question, Cairns and colleagues asked whether another mutation, unrelated to the metabolism of lactose, had also occurred on the plates.
They chose to assay for the production of ValR mutations, which confer resistance to high concentrations of the amino acid valine.
The assay was easily accomplished by overlaying the plates with agar containing valine and glucose.
Only ValR mutants will grow.

Cairns and co-workers reasoned that if the lac+ mutations were not necessarily in response t o the lactose, then ValR mutations should arise with a similar distribution as earlier observed for the lac mutations.
The result was that plates accumulating lac+ mutants were not, at the same time, accumulating ValR mutations. 
The researchers concluded that the increased frequency of mutations affecting lactose metabolism was the result of the presence of lactose in the medium.
This is, of course, an indirect inference.

Cairns' work suggests that the bacterial cell's genetic machinery can respond to its environment by producing adaptive mutations.
This conclusion is contrary to the current thinking that mutations are completely spontaneous events, many of which occur as random errors during replication of DNA.
As Cairns has pointed out, these findings, at first glance, seem to support the romantic notion that life is mysterious and that certain observations cannot be explained in simple, straightforward terms based on the laws of physics.
Whatever the case may be, Cairns' observations are not isolated examples.

Barry Hall's work demonstrated a similar adaptive response by E. coli to growth on salicin.
In this case, interestingly, a two-step genetic change was required.
The first occurred in response to salicin even though that mutation offered no selective advantage without the second genetic alteration, the removal, or deletion, of a segment of nucleotides called an insertion sequence (IS). 
Further, the changes must occur sequentially.
They do so at a much higher frequency than predicted, provided salicin is present in the growth medium.
The observed frequency is several orders of magnitude higher.

What possible explanation can account for observations such as these?
As Barry Hall has pointed out, our failure to explain such phenomena adequately may be attributable to our ignorance of fundamental mechanisms and rates of mutations in nongrowing cells.
Such information and:
knowledge are extremely important because this physiological condition is much more akin to a natural environment as opposed to that found with cells grown in rich media under laboratory conditions. 
One suggestion is that under stressful nutritional conditions (starvation), bacteria may be capable of activating mechanisms that create a hypermutable state in genes that will enhance survival. 

In the context of a textbook such as this, an important idea to be realized from this discussion is that knowledge may often be derived from observations that initially cannot be explained.
This and the ensuing debates and surrounding controversy are what constantly maintain intrigue and interest in science.

Classification of Mutations

We turn now to a consideration of the way in which mutations are classified.

There are various schemes by which mutations are organized. 
They are not mutually exclusive, but instead depend simply on which aspects of mutation are being investigated or discussed. 
In this section we describe three sets of distinctions concerning mutations.

Spontaneous versus Induced Mutations 

Aside from our earlier discussion of the random nature of mutations, all mutations are described as either spontaneous or induced.
Although these two categories overlap to some degree, spontaneous mutations are those that just happen in nature. 
No specific agents are associated with their occurrence, and they are generally assumed to be random changes in the nucleotide sequences of genes.
Most such mutations are linked to normal chemical processes that alter the structure of nitrogenous bases that are part of existing genes.
Most spontaneous mutations are thought to occur during the enzymatic process of DNA replication, an idea that we will discuss later in this chapter. 
Once an error is present in the genetic code, it may be reflected in the amino acid composition of the specified protein. 
If the changed amino acid is present in a part of the molecule critical to its structure or biochemical activity, a functional alteration can result.

In contrast to such spontaneous events, those that arise as a result of the influence of any artificial factor are considered to be induced mutations.
It is generally agreed that any natural phenomenon that heightens chemical reactivity in cells will induce mutations.
For example, radiation from cosmic and mineral sources and ultraviolet radiation from the Sun are energy sources to which most organisms are exposed.
As such, these energy sources may be factors that cause spontaneous mutations.
However, the earliest demonstration of the artificial induction of mutation occurred in 1927, when Herman J. Muller reported that X-rays could cause mutations in Drosophila .

In 1928, Lewis J. Stadler reported the same finding in barley.
In addition to various forms of radiation, a wide spectrum of the chemical agents is also known to be mutagenic, the aspects of which we will examine later in this chapter.

Gametic versus Somatic Mutations 

When considering the effects of mutation in eukaryotic organisms, it is important to distinguish whether the change occurs in somatic cells or in gametes.
Mutations arising in somatic cells are not transmitted to future generations.
Mutations occurring in somatic cells that create recessive autosomal alleles are rarely of any consequence to the organism.
Expression of most such mutations is likely to be masked by the dominant allele.
Somatic mutations will have a greater impact if they are dominant or if they are X-linked, since such mutations are most likely to be immediately expressed.

Similarly, the impact will be more noticeable if such somatic mutations occur early in development, where undifferentiated cells will give rise to several differentiated tissues or organs. 
Mutations occurring in adult tissues are often masked by the thousands upon thousands of nonmutant cells performing the normal function.

Mutations in gametes or gamete-forming tissue are part of the germ line and are of greater significance because they are transmitted to offspring.
They have the potential of being expressed in all cells of an offspring.
Dominant autosomal mutations will be expressed phenotypically in the first generation.
X-linked recessive motations arising in the gametes of a heterogametic female may be expressed in hemizygous male offspring.
This will occur provided that the male offspring receives the affected X chromosome.
Because of heterozygosity, the occurrence of an autosomal recessive mutation in the gametes of either males or females (even one resulting in a lethal allele) may go unnoticed for many generations until the resultant allele has become widespread in the population. 

The new allele will become evident only when a chance mating brings two copies of it together in the homozygous condition. 

Other Catogories of Mutation

Aside from their point of origin (somatic versus gametic), various types of mutations may be classified on the basis of their phenotypic effects.
A single mutation may well fall into more than one category.
The most obvious mutations are those affecting a morphological trait.
For example, all of Mendel's pea characters and many genetic variations encountered in the study of Drosophila fit this designation, since they cause obvious changes in the morphology of the organism.
Such variations are recognized on the basis of their deviation from the normal or wild-type phenotype.

A second broad category of mutations include those that exhibit nutritional or biochemical variations in phenotype.
In bacteria and fungi, the inability to synthesize an amino acid or vitamin is an example of a typical nutritional mutation. 
In humans, hemophilia is an example of a biochemical mutation.
While such mutations in these organisms are not visible and do not always affect specific morphological characters, they can have a more general effect on the well-being and survival of the affected individual.

A third category consists of mutations that affect behavior patterns of an organism.
For example, mating behavior or circadian rhythms of animals can be altered.
The primary effect of behavior mutations is often difficult to discern.

For example, the mating behavior of a fruit fly may be impaired if it cannot beat its wings.
However, the defect may be in (1) the flight muscles; (2) the nerves leading to them; or (3) the brain, where the nerve impulses that initiate wing movements originate.
The study of behavior and the genetic factors influencing it has benefited immensely from investigations of behavior mutations.

Still another type of mutation may affect the regulation of genes.
A regulatory gene may produce a product that controls the transcription of another gene.
In other instances, a region of DNA either close to or far away from a gene may modulate its activity.
In either case, regulatory mutations can disrupt this process and permanently activate or inactivate a gene.
Our knowledge of genetic regulation has been dependent on the study of mutations that disrupt this process.

Another group consists of lethal mutations.
Nutritional and biochemical mutations can also fall into this category.
A mutant bacterium that cannot synthesize a specific amino acid it needs will cease to grow if plated on a medium lacking that amino acid.
Various human biochemical disorders, such as Tay-Sachs disease and Huntington disease, are lethal at different points in the life cycle of humans.

Finally, any of the above groups can exist as conditional mutations.
Even though a mutation is present in the genome of an organism, it may not be evident except under certain conditions. 
Among the best examples are temperature-sensitive mutations, found in a variety of organisms.
At certain "permissive" temperatures, a mutant gene product functions normally, only to lose its functional capability at a "restrictive" temperature. 
When shifted to this temperature, the impact of the mutation becomes apparent, even lethal, and is amenable to investigation. 
The study of conditional mutations has be en extremely important in experimental genetics, particularly in understanding the function of genes essential to the viability of organisms. 

Detection of Mutations

Before geneticists can study directly the mutational process or obtain mutant organisms for genetic investigations, they must be able to detect mutations.
The ease and efficiency of detecting mutations in a particular organism has by and large determined the organism's usefulness in genetic studies.
In this section we use several examples to illustrate how mutations are detected.

Detection in Bacteria and Fungi 

Detection of mutations is most efficient in haploid microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi.
Detection depends on a selection system where mutant cells are isolated easily from nonmutant cells.
The general principles are similar in bacteria and fungi.
To illustrate, we will describe how nutritional mutations in the fungus Neurospora crassa are detected.
The life cycle of this organism was diagrammed in Figure 7.10. 

Neurospora is a pink mold that normally grows on bread. 
It may also be cultured in the laboratory.
This eukaryotic mold is haploid in the vegetative phase of its life cycle.
Thus, recessive mutations may be detected without the complications generated by heterozygosity in diploid organisms. 

Visible mutant traits such as albino have been well studied, but the full potential of Neurospora genetics was attained during the investigation of nutritional mutants.
Wild-type Neurospora grows on a minimal culture medium of glucose, a few inorganic acids and salts, a nitrogen source such as ammonium nitrate, and the vitamin biotin.
Induced nutritional mutants will not grow on minimal medium, but will grow on a supplemented or complete medium that also contains numerous amino acids, vitamins, nucleic acid derivatives, and so forth.

Microorganisms that are nutritional wild types (requiring only minimal medium) are called prototrophs, whereas those mutants that require a specific supplement to the minimal medium are called auxotrophs.

The procedural details for the detection and characterization of nutritional mutations in Neurospora are illustrated in Figure 14.1.
Haploid conidia bearing such a mutation can be detected and isolated by their failure to grow on minimal medium and their ability to grow on complete medium.
The mutant cells can no longer synthesize some essential compound absent in minimal medium but present in complete medium [Figure 14.1(a)].
Once a nutritional mutant is detected and isolated, the missing compound can be determined by at tempts to grow the mutant strain in a series of tubes, each containing minimal medium supplemented with a single compound [Figure 14.1(b) and (c)].
In this example, mutants can grow if tyrosine is supplied.
Thus, the mutation is a tyrosine auxotroph (tyr-).
Recall that this was the procedure utilized by Beadle and Tatum in their pioneering research leading to the "one-gene:
one-enzyrne" hypothesis, as discussed in Chapter 13.

Figure 14.0

Mutant erythrocytes derived from an individual whit sicle-cell anemia

Genomic Organization of DNA

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

The DNA composing the genome of organisms is organized in a manner consistent with the complexity of the host structure with which it is associated.
Viruses, bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts contain a shorter, often circular, DNA molecule relatively free of proteins.
Eukaryotic cells contain greater amounts of DNA organized into nucleosomes and present as chromatin fibers.
This increase in complexly is related to the larger amount of genetic information present as well as the greater complexly associated with their genetic function.
In eukaryotes, genes are organized in various ways, ranging from single copies to families of related genes repeated in tandem arrays.
The eukaryotic genome contains large amounts of noncoding DNA, some of which interrupts the coding portions of genes.

Once it was understood that DNA houses genetic information, it was very important to determine how DNA is organized into genes and how these basic units of genetic function are organized into chromosomes.
In short, the major question was how the genetic material is organized as it makes up the genome of organisms.
There has been much interest in this question because knowledge of the organization of the genetic material and associated molecules is important to the understanding of many other areas of genetics.
For example, how the genetic information is stored, expressed, and regulated must be related to the molecular organization of the genetic molecule, DNA.
How genomic organization varies in different organisms-from viruses to bacteria to enkaryotes-will undoubtedly provide a better understanding of the evolution of organisms on earth. 
In eukaryotic genetic, how DNA with proteins to form chromatin, and how the chromatin fibers characteristic of interphase are condensed into chromosome structures visible during mitosis and meiosis, are both important questions.

In this chapter, we first provide a survey of the various ways DNA is organized into chromosomes, including examples from viruses, bacteria, and eukaryotes.
The genetic material has been studied using numerous approaches, including molecular analysis and direct visualization by light and electron microscopy. 

We will then turn to the consideration of how genes are organized as part of chromosomes.
As we shall see, such organization is least complex in bacteriophages and bacteria. 
In their genomes, a chromosome consists largely of an array of tightly packed contiguous genes.
The vast majority of DNA en codes gene tic information or consists of control elements involved in the regulation of gene expression.

In comparison, the vast majority of DNA in most eukaryotes fails to encode genetic information or be involved in genetic regulation.
Nor are genes tightly packed together.
As we saw earlier in the text (see Chapter 12) a large portion of many eukaryotic genes consists of noncoding DNA sequences called introns and flanking sequences that do not become part of the final RNA transcript.
Further, we shall see that related genes are often arranged and regulated in groups or families and that a large portion of the total DNA comprising the genome of eukaryotes consists of nongenic regions that often are occupied by repetitive DNA sequences.

Many of the findings related to genomic organization over the past several decades, which we shall recount in this chapter, represent some of the most exciting and most unexpected discoveries made in the field of genetics.
For all geneticists, but particularly those trained prior to the 1970s, these discoveries have served as a constant source of wonderment.
Perhaps we would have all been better prepared to learn of the complexity of genes and genomes, particularly those of enkaryotes, had we paid more attention to the quotation from Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking Glass, which was insightfully included by Richard B. Goldschmidt in his look into the future during his Presidential Address to the IX International Congress of Genetics in 1954: 

"I can't believe that," said Alice.
"Can't you?
" the Queen said in a pitying tone.
"Try again:
draw a long breath, and shut your eyes."

Alice laughed.
"There's no use trying," she said. 
"One can't believe impossible things."

"I dare say you haven't had much practice," said the Queen. 
"When I was your age I did it for half-an-hour a day. 
Why, sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast."

For all of us interested in genetics, it is certain that the next "impossible thing" regarding the organization of the genetic material is just around the corner!

Viral and Bacterial Chromosomes 

In comparison with eukaryotes, the chromosomes of viruses and bacteria are much less complicated.
They usually consist of a single nucleic acid molecule, largely devoid of associated proteins.
Contained within the single chromosome of viruses and bacteria is much less genetic information than in the multiple chromosomes comprising the genome of higher forms.
These characteristics have greatly simplified analysis, providing a fairly comprehensive view of the structure of viral and bacterial chromosomes.

The chromosomes of viruses consist of a nucleic acid molecule -either DNA or RNA- that can be either single or double stranded.
They may exist as circular structures (closed loops), or they may take the form of linear molecules.
The single-stranded DNA of the X174 bacteriophage and the double-stranded DNA of the polyoma vitus are ring-shaped molecules housed within the protein coat of the mature virus.
The bacteriophage lambda (A), on the other hand, possesses a linear double-stranded DNA molecule prior to infection, which closes to form a ring upon infection of the host cell.
Still other viruses, such as the T-even series of bacteriophages, have linear, double-stranded chromosomes of DNA, which do not form circles inside the bacterial host.
Thus, circularity is not an absolute requirement for replication in some viruses.

Viral nucleic acid molecules have been visualized with the electron microscope.

Figure 17.1 shows a mature bacteriophage lambda with its double-stranded DNA molecule in the circular configuration.
One constant feature shared by viruses, bacteria, and enkaryotic cells is the ability to package an exceedingly long DNA molecule into a relatively small volume.
In l, the DNA is 17 Mm long and must fit into the phage head, which is less than 0.1 Mm on any side.

Table 17.1 compares the length of the chromosomes of several viruses to the size of their head structure.
In each case, a similar packaging feat must be accomplished.
The dimensions given for phage T2 may be compared with the micrograph of bath the DNA and the viral particle shown in Figure 17.2.
Seldom does the space available in the head of a virus exceed the chromosome volume by more than a factor of two.
In many cases, almost all space is filled, indicating nearly perfect packing.
Once packed within the head, the genetic material is functionally inert until released into a host cell.

Bacterial chromosomes are also relatively simple in form. 
They always consist of a double-stranded DNA molecule, compacted into a structure sometimes referred to as the nucleoid.
Escherichia coli , the most extensively studied bacterium, has a large, circular chromosome, measuring approximately 1200 Mm (1.2 mm) in length.
When the cell is gently lysed and the chromosome released, it can be visualized under the electron microscope (Figure 17.3).

This DNA is found to be associated with several types of DNA-binding proteins, including those called HU and H.
They are small but abundant in the cell and contain a high percentage of positively charged amino acids that can bond ionically to the negative charges of the phosphate groups in DNA.
As we will soon see, these proteins resemble structurally similar molecules called histones that are found associated with eukaryotic DNA.
Unlike the tightly packed chromosome of a virus, the bacterial chromosome is not functionally inert.

Despite the compacted condition of the bacterial chromosome, replication and transcription readily occur.

Supercoiling and Circular DNA

One major insight into the way in which DNA is organized and packaged has come from the discovery of supercoiled DNA, characteristic of covalently closed circular molecules and chromosomal loops.
Supercoiled DNA was first proposed as a result of a study of double stranded DNA molecules derived from the polyoma virus, which causes tumors in mice.
In 1963, it was observed that when such DNA was subjected to high-speed centrifugation, it was resolved into three distinct components, each of different density and compactness.
That which was least compact, and thus least dense, demonstrated a decreased sedimentation velocity; the other two fractions each showed greater velocities owing to their greater compaction and density.
All three were of identical molecular weight.

Table 17.1

The Genetic Material of Representative Viruses and Bacteria

Organism.
Type.
SS or DS.
Length (Mm).
Overall Size of Viral Head or Bacteria (Mn).


X174.
DNA.
SS.
2.0.
0.025 X 0.025.


Tobacco mosaic virus.
RNA.
SS.
3.3.
0.30 x 0.02.


Lambda phage .
DNA.
DS.
17.0.
0.07 x 0.07.


T2.
phage.
DNA.
DS.
52.0.
0.07 X 0.10 .


Hemophilus influenzae.
DNA .
DS.
832.0.
1.0 x 0.30.


Escherichia coli .
DNA.
DS.
1200.0.
2.00 x 0.50.


In 1965 Jerome Vinograd proposed an explanation for the above observations. 
He postulated that the two fractions of greatest sedimentation velocity both consisted of polyoma DNA molecules that are circular, whereas the fraction of lower sedimentation contained polyoma DNA molecules that are linear.
Closed circular molecules are more compact, and they sediment more rapidly than do linear molecules of the same length and molecular weight.

Vinograd proposed further that the more dense of the two fractions of circular molecules consisted of covalently closed DNA helices that are slightly underwound in comparison to the less dense circular molecules.
Energetic forces stabilizing the double helix resist this underwinding, causing it to supercoil in order to retain normal base pairing.
Vinograd proposed that it is the supercoiled shape that causes tighter packing and thus the increase in sedimentation velocity.

The transitions described above can be visualizad in Figure 17.4.
Consider a double-stranded linear molecule that exists in the normal Watson-Crick right-handed helix [Figure 17.4(a)].
This helix contains 20 complete turns, which defines the linking number (L = 20) of this molecule.
If the ends of the molecule are scaled, a closed circle is formed [Figure 17.4(b)], which is energetically relaxed.
Suppose, however, that the circle is cut open, underwound by several full turns, and resealed [Figure 17.4(c)].
Such a structure, where L is equal to 18, is energetically "strained," and as a result it will exist only temporarily in this form.

In order to assume a more energetically favorable conformation, the molecule can form supercoils in the direction opposite of the underwound helix.
In our case [Figure 17.4(d)], two negative supercoils are introduced spontaneously, reestablishing the total number of original "turns" in the helix.
The use of the term "negative" refers to the fact that, by definition, the supercoils are left-handed.
The end result is the formation of a more compact structure with enhanced physical stability.

In most closed circular DNA molecules in bacteria and their phages, DNA is slightly underwound [as in Figure 17.4(c)].
For example, the virus SV40 contains 5200 base pairs, where 10.4 base pairs occupy each complete turn of the helix.

The linking number can be calculated as L = 5200/10.4 = 500.

When circular SV40 DNA is analyzed, it is underwound by 25 turns and L is equal to only 475.
Predictably, the presence of 2 5 negative supercoils is observed.

In E. coli , an even larger number of supercoils is observed, greatly facilitating chromosome condensation in the nucleoid region.

When two otherwise identical molecules demonstrate a difference in their linking number, they are said to be topoisomers of one another.
The only way in which these two topoisomers whose ends are constrained (not free to rotate) can be interconverted is by cutting one or both of the strands and winding or unwinding the helix before resealing the ends.
Biologically, this may be accomplished by any one of a group of enzymes, appropriately called topoisomerases.
First discovered by Martin Gellert and James Wang, these catalytic molecules are either type I or II, depending on whether they cleave one or both strands in the helix, respectively.
In E. coli , topoisomerase I serves to reduce the number of negative super coils in a closed-circular DNA molecule.
Topoisomerase II introduces negative supercoils into DNA.

This enzyme is thought to bind to DNA, twist it, cleave both strands, and then pass them through the "loop" that it has created.
Once the phosphodiester bonds are reformed, the linking number is decreased and one or more supercoils form spontaneously. 

Supercoiled DNA and topoisomerases are also found in eukaryotes. 
While the chromosomes in these organisms are not usually circular, supercoils are made possible when areas of DNA are embedded in a lattice of proteins associated with the chromatin fibers.
This association creates "anchored" ends that provide the stability for the maintenance of supercoils once they are introduced by topoisomerases.

Transcription of eukaryotic DNA into RNA faces several obstacles not encountered in prokaryotes.
Most notable is the way in which DNA is packaged into structures called nucleosomes. 
In most studies to date, the formation of supercoils induced by topoisomerases has been implicated as a major factor in facilitating transcription.
These enzymes may well play still other genetic roles involving DNA conformational changes. 

Mitochondrial and Chloroplast DNA 

Numerous observations have demonstrated that both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain their own genetic information.
This was suggested by the discovery of mutations in yeast, other fungi, and plants that alter the function of these organelles (see Chapter 8).
Furthermore, transmission of these mutations did not always demonstrate biparental inheritance patterns characteristic of nuclear genes.
Instead, a uniparental mode of inheritance was observed, with traits being passed to offspring only from their mother.
Because the inheritance of both mitochondria and chloroplasts is also uniparental, these observations suggested that these organelles might house their own DNA that influences their function.

Thus, geneticists set out to look for more direct evidence of DNA in these organelles.
Electron microscopists not only documented the presence of DNA in both organelles, but they also saw DNA in a form quite unlike that seen in the nucleus of the eukaryotic cells that house these organelles.
This DNA looked remarkably similar to that seen in viruses and bacteria! 
As we shall see, this similarity, among other observations, led to the idea that both mitochondria and chloroplasts are derived from primitive organisms that were free-living and much like bacterial organisms.

Molecular Organization and Function of Mitochondrial DNA

Extensive information is now available about the molecular aspects of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and related gene function. 
In most eukaryotes, mtDNA (Figure 17.5) is a circular duplex that replicates semiconservatively and is free of the chromosomal proteins characteristic of eukaryotic DNA.
In size, mtDNA differs among organisms.
This can be seen by examining the information presented in Table 17.2.
In a variety of animals, mtDNA consists of about 16,000 to 18,000 base pairs (16-18 kb).
In vertebrates, there are 5 to 10 DNA molecules per organelle.
A considerably greater amount of mtDNA is present in plant mitochondria, where 100 kb is not unusual.

Several general statements can now be made concerning mtDNA. 
There appear to be few or no gene repetitions, and replication is dependent upon enzymes encoded by nuclear DNA.
Mitochondrial genes have be en identified that code for the ribosomal RNAs, over 20 tRNAs, and numerous products essential to the cellular respiratory functions of the organelles.

Table 17.2

The Size of mtDNA in Different Organisms

Organism.
Size in Kilobases.


Human.
16.6.


Mouse.
16.2.


xenopus (frog).
18.4 .


Drosophila (fruit fly).
18.4.


Saccharomyces (yeast).
84.0.


Pisum sativum (pea).
110.0.


Table 17.3

Sedimentation Coefficient of Mitochondrial Ribosomes

Kingdom.
Examples.
Sedimentation Coefficient (S).


Animals.
Vertebrates .
55-60.


Animals.
Insects.
60-71.


Protists.
Euglena.
71.


Protists.
Tetrabymena.
80.


Fungi.
Neurospora.
73-80.


Fungi.
Saccharomyres.
72-80.


Plants .
Maize.
77.


The protein-synthesizing apparatus and the molecular components for cellular respiration are jointly derived from nuclear and mitochondrial DNA.
Ribosomes found in the organelle are different from those present in the cytoplasm.
The sedimentation coefficient of these particles varies among different species. 
The data in Table 17.3 show that mitochondrial ribosomes vary considerably in their coefficients (55S to 60S in vertebrates, to 70S in some algae and fungi, 80S in certain protozoans and fungi).

Many nuclear-coded gene products are essential to biological activity within mitochondria:
DNA and RNA polymerases, initiation and elongation factors essential for translation, ribosomal proteins, aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, and some tRNA species.
As in chloroplasts, these imported components are distinct from their cytoplasmic counterparts, even though both sets are coded by nuclear genes.
For example, the synthetase enzymes essential for charging mitochondrial tRNA molecules (a process essential to translation) show a distinct affinity for the mitochondrial tRNA species as compared to the cytoplasmic tRNAs.
Similar affinity has been shown for the initiation and elongation factors.
Furthermore, while bacterial and nuclear RNA polymerases are known to be composed of numerous subunits, the mitochondrial variety consists of only one polypeptide chain.
This polymerase is generally susceptible to antibiotics that inhibit bacterial RNA synthesis but not to eukaryotic inhibitors.
The contributions of nuclear and mitochondrial gene products are contrasted in Figure 17.6.

The above information, along with that about to be presented concerning chloroplast DNA function, supplements our earlier discussion of modes of inheritance that are "extranuclear," which was earlier presented in Chapter 8.

Figure 17.0

Chromatin fibers viewed using a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM)

Figure 17.1

Electron micrographs of (a) phage {lambda} and (b) the DNA isolated from it

The chromosome is 17 Mm long.
Note that the phages in part (a) are magnified about five times more than the DNA in part (b).

Figure 17.2

Electron micrograph of bacteriophage T2, which has had its DNA released by osmotic shock

The chromosome is 52 Mm long.

Figure 17.3

Electron micrograph of the bacterium Escherichia coli , which has had its DNA released by osmotic shock

The chromosome is 1200 Mm Long.

Figure 17.4

Depictions of the transformations leading to the supercoiling of circular DNA as described in the text

L equals the linking number.

Figure 17.5

Electron micrograph of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) derived from Xenopus laevis

Figure 17.6

FIGURE 17.6 A comparison of the origin of gene products that are essential to mitochondrial function

Those shown entering the organelle are derived from the cytoplasm and encoded by the nucleus.

Regulation of Gene Expression in Bacteria and Phages

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Efficient expression of genetic information is dependent on regulatory mechanisms that either activate or repress gene activity.
In bacteria, mechanisms exist that regulate genes ways that meet metabolic needs of the cell.
Gene regulation in bacteriophages determines the mode of existence of the virus within the bacterial host.
In bacteria and their phages these mechanisms provide responses to the prevailing cellular and extracellular conditions.

In earlier chapters we established how DNA is organized into genes, how genes store genetic information, and how this information is expressed.
We now consider one of the most fundamental issues in molecular genetics:
How is genetic expression regulated?
The evidence in support of the idea that genes can be turned on and off is very convincing.
Detailed analysis of proteins in Escherichia coli has shown that concentrations of the 4000 or so polypeptide chains encoded by the genome vary widely.
Some proteins may be present in as few as 5 to 10 molecules per cell, whereas others, such as ribosomal proteins and the many proteins involved in the glycolytic pathway, are present in as many as l00,000 copies per cell.
While a basal level (a few copies) of most gene products exists continuously, this level can be dramatically increased and subsequently decreased in prokaryotes.
This makes it clear that fundamental regulatory mechanisms must exist to control the expression of the genetic information.

In this chapter, we will explore what is know about the regulation of genetic expression in bacteria and bacteriophages. 
In numerous instances, highly detailed information has now been obtained.
In the following chapter, we will focus on the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes.

Genetic Regulation in Prokaryotes: 

An Overview

The regulation of gene expression has be en extensively studied in prokaryotes, particularly in E. coli .
What has been found is that highly efficient genetic mechanisms have evolved that turn genes on and off, depending on the cell's metabolic need for the respective gene products.
The activity of enzymes may also be regulated once they have been synthesized in the cell, but we will focus primarily on what is known about regulation at the level of gene transcription.
It is important to remember that it is the resulting levels of proteins ultimately present or absent that are critical to efficient cell function under varying environmental conditions.

It is not a particularly new concept that microorganisms regulate the synthesis of gene products.
As early as 1900 it was shown that when lactose (a galactose-glucose-containing disaccharide) is present in the growth medium of yeast, enzymes specific to lactose metabolism are produced.
When lactose is absent, the enzymes are not manufactured.
It was soon shown that bacteria "adapt" to their chemical environment, producing certain enzymes only when specific substrates are present.
Such enzymes were thus referred to as adaptive.
In contrast, enzymes that are produced continuously regardless of the chemical makeup of the environment were called constitutive.
Since then the term adaptive in descriptive enzymology has been replaced with a more accurate term.
We now call them inducible enzymes, reflecting the role of the substrate, which serves as the inducer in their production.

More recent investigation has revealed other cases where the presence of a specific molecule causes inhibition of genetic expression.
This is usually true for molecules that are end products of biosynthetic pathways.
For example, an amino acid such as tryptophan can be synthesized by bacterial cells.
If an exogenous supply of this amino acid is present in the environment or culture medium, it is energetically inefficient to synthesize the enzymes necessary for tryptophan production. 
A mechanism has evolved whereby tryptophan plays a role in repressing transcription of RNA essential to the production of the appropriate biosynthetic enzymes.
In contrast to the inducible system controlling lactose metabolism, that governing tryptophan is said to be repressible.

As we will soon see, instances of regulation, whether inducible or repressible, may be under either negative or positive control. 
Under negative control, genetic expression occurs unless it is shut off by some form of regulator.
This is in contrast to positive control, where transcription does not occur unless a regulator molecule directly stimulates RNA production.
In theory, each type of control can govern inducible or repressible systems.
Examples discussed in the ensuing sections of this chapter will help distinguish between these possible mechanisms. 

Lactose Metabolism in E. coli :

An Inducible Gene System

In prokaryotes, structural genes tend to be organized in clusters controlled from a single regulatory site.
Together, this group of genes constitutes what is called an operon.
The regulatory site is linked to the gene cluster it controls and is known as a cis-acting element.
The cis-acting sites are usually located upstream (at the 5'-end) from the gene cluster they regulate.
Usually, the genes in the cluster produce products with related functions such as the reactions involved in a single metabolic pathway.
Interactions at the regulatory site involve the binding of molecules that control transcription of the gene cluster.

Such molecules are called trans-acting elements, because they are not physically linked to the genes they regulate.
Interactions at the regulatory site determine whether the genes are expressed or not.
In this section, we will discuss how such a bacterial gene cluster is coordinately regulated. 

The gene cluster involved in the metabolism of lactose in E. coli has been extensively investigated and today serves as the paradigm for the study of genetic regulation.
Beginning in 1946 with the studies of Jacques Monod and continuing through the next decade with significant contributions by Joshua Lederberg, Franois Jacob, and Andre L'woff, genetic and biochemical evidence was amassed.
This research provided insights into the way in which the gene activity responsible for lactose metabolism is repressed when lactose is absent but induced when it is available. 
In the presence of lactose, the concentration of the enzymes responsible for its metabolism increases rapidly from 5 to 10 molecules to thousands per cell.
The enzymes are described as inducible, and lactose serves as the inducer.

Paramount to the understanding of how gene expression is controlled in this system was the discovery of regulatory units that are part of the gene cluster.

They consist of a regulatory gene and a regulatory site, neither of which encodes enzymes necessary for lactose metabolism. 
Three other genes are responsible for the production of enzymes involved in lactose metabolism.
The entire cluster is illustrated in Figure 18.1.
As shown, the three structural genes and the adjacent regulatory site constitute the operon.
Together, the entire cluster functions in an integrated fashion to provide a rapid response to the presence or absence of lactose.

Structural Genes

Genes coding for the primary structure of the enzymes are called structural genes.
The so-called lacZ gene specifies the amino acid sequence of the enzyme, B-galactosidase, which converts lactose to glucose and galactose (Figure 18.2).

This conversion is essential if lactose is to serve as the primary energy source in glycolysis.
The second gene, lacY, specifies the primary structure of p-galactoside permease, an enzyme that facilitates the entry of lactose into the bacterial cell.
The third gene, laca, codes for the enzyme transacetylase whose physiological role is still not completely clear.

Studies of the genes coding for these three enzymes relied on the isolation of numerous mutations that eliminated the function of one or the other enzyme.
Such lac-mutants were first isolated and studied by Joshua Lederberg.
Mutant cells that fail to produce active B-galactosidase (lacZ-) or permease (lacY-) are unable to utilize lactose as an energy source.
Mutations also were found in the transacetylase gene.
Mapping studies by Lederberg established that all three genes are closely linked or contiguous to one another in the order Z-Y-A (see Figure 18.1).

Two other observations are relevant to what became known about the structural genes.
First, knowledge of their close linkage led to the discovery that all three genes are transcribe d as a single unit, resulting in what is called a polycistronic mRNA (Figure 18.3).
As a result, all three genes are coordinately regulated since a single message serves as the basis for translation of all three gene products.
Additionally, it has been shown that upon induction by lactose, the rapid appearance of the enzymes results from the de novo synthesis of this mRNA.
Although this finding might seem obvious or expected, it is in contrast to the proposal that induced enzyme activity may result from the activation of existing but inactive forms of the enzymes.

The Discovery of Regulatory Mutations 

How does lactose activate structural genes and induce the synthesis of the related enzymes?
The discovery and study of gratuitous inducers ruled out one possibility.
These molecules, which are chemical analogues of lactose, behave as inducers but they do not serve as substrates for the enzymes that are subsequently synthesized.
One such gratuitous inducer is the sulfur analogue isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG), shown in Figure 18.4.
The discovery that such molecules exist is strong evidence that the primary induction event does not depend on the interaction between the inducer and the enzyme. 
What, then, is the role of lactose in induction?

The answer to this question required the study of a class of mutations called constitutive mutants.
In this type of mutant, the enzymes are produced regardless of the presence or absence of lactose.
These mutations were used to study the regulatory scheme for lactose metabolism.

Maps of the first type of constitutive mutation, lacI- showed that it is located at a site on the DNA close to, but distinct from, the structural genes.
As we will soon see, the lacI gene is appropriately called a repressor gene.
A second set of mutations produced identical effects but was found in a region immediately adjacent to the structural genes. 
This class of mutations is designated lacOc and identifies the operator region of the operon.
Because inducibility has be en eliminate d (the enzymes are continually produced) in both types of constitutive mutation, they clearly represent genetic changes that have disrupted regulation.

The Operon Model: Negative Control 

In 1961, Jacob and Monod proposed a scheme of negative control of regulation called the operon model, whereby a group of genes is regulated and expressed together as a unit.
In their specific model (Figure 18.5), the operon consists of the Z, Y and A structural genes as well as the adjacent sequences of DNA referred to as the operator region.
They argued that the lad gene regulates the transcription of the structural genes by producing a repressor molecule.
The repressor was hypothesized to be allosteric, meaning that the molecule reversibly interacts with another molecule, causing both a conformational change in three-dimensional shape and a change in chemical activity. 

Jacob and Monod suggested that the repressor normally interacts with the DNA sequence of the operator region.
When it does so, it inhibits the action of RNA polymerase, effectively repressing the transcription of the structural genes [Figure 18.5(b)].
However, when lactose is present, this disaccharide binds to the repressor, causing the allosteric conformational change.
This change alters the binding site of the repressor, rendering it incapable of interacting with operator DNA [Figure 18.5(c)].
In the absence of the repressor-operator interaction, RNA polymerase transcribes the structural genes, and the enzymes necessary for lactose metabolism are produced.
Since transcription occurs only when the repressor fails to bind to the operator region, negative control is exerted.

The operon model uses these potential molecular interactions to explain the efficient regulation of the structural genes. 
In the absence of lactose, the enzymes encoded by the genes are not needed and are repressed.
When lactose is present, it indirectly induces the activation of the genes by binding with the repressor.
If all lactose is metabolized, none is available to bind to the repressor, which is again free to bind to operator DNA and repress transcription.

Both the I- and Oc constitutive mutations interfere with these molecular interactions, allowing continnous transcription of the structural genes.
In the case of the I-mutant, the repressor product is altered and cannot bind to the operator region, so the structural genes are always turned on.
In the case of the Oc mutant, the nucleotide sequence of the operator DNA is altered and will not bind with a normal repressor molecule.
The result is the same:
Structural genes are always transcribed.
Both types of constitutive mutations are illustrated diagrammatically in Figure 18.5(d) and (e).

Genetic Proof of the Operon Model 

The operon model is a good one because there are predictions derived from it that can be tested to determine its validity. 
The major predictions to be tested are that (1) the I gene produces a diffusible cellular product; (2) the O region is involved in regulation but does not produce a product; and (3) the O region must be adjacent to the structural genes in order to regulate transcription.

The construction of partial diploid bacteria (see Chapter 6) allows an assessment of these assumptions, particularly those that predict transacting regulatory elements.
For example, certain mating schemes make it possible to construct genotypes where an l+ gene has been introduced into an I-host, or where an O+ region is added to an Oc host.
In such cases, the entire host chromosome is present plus one or a few genes of choice.
They are inserted as part of a plasmid called the F factor, designated F' (see Chapter 6).
The Jacob-Monod operon model predicts that adding an I+ gene to an I-cell should restore inducibility, because a normal repressor would again be produced.
Adding an O+ region to an Oc cell should have no effect on constitutive enzyme production, since regulation depends on an O+ region immediately adjacent to the structural genes.

Results of these experiments are shown in Table 18.1, where Z represents the structural genes.
The inserted genes are listed after the designation F'.
In both cases described above, the Jacob-Monod model is upheld (part B of Table 18.1). 
Part C shows the reverse experiments, where either an I-gene or an Oc region is added to cells of normal inducible genotypes.
The model predicts that inducibility will be maintained in these partial diploids, and it is.

Table 18.1

A Comparison of Gene Activity (+ or -) in the Presence or Absence of Lactose for Various E. coli Genotypes

Genotype.
Lactose Present.
Lactose Absent.


I+O+Z+.
I+tO+Z- .
I-O+Z+.
I+Ocz-.
I-O+Z+/F'I+ .
I+OcZ+/F'O+.
I+O+Z+/F'I-.
I+O+Z+/F'OC.
IO+z+.
IsO+Z+/F'I+.


Another prediction of the operon model is that certain mutations in the I gene should have the opposite effect of I-.
That is, instead of being constitutive by failing to interact with the operator, mutant repressor molecules should be produced that cannot interact with the inducer, lactose.
As a result, the repressor would always bind to the operator sequence, and the structural genes would be permanently repressed.
If this were the case, the presence of an additional l+ gene would have little or no effect on repression.

In fact, as shown in part D of Table 18.1, such a mutation, Is, was discovered where the operon is "super-repressed." An additional I+ gene does not effectively relieve repression of gene activity.
These observations again support the operon model for gene regulation.

Isolation of the Repressor

Although the operon theory of Jacob and Monod succeeded in explaining many aspects of genetic regulation in prokaryotes, the nature of the repressor molecule was not known when their landmark paper was published in 1961.
Although they had assumed that the allosteric repressor was a protein, RNA was also a candidate because activity of the molecule required the ability to bind to DNA.

Despite many attempts to isolate and characterize the hypothetical repressor molecule, no direct chemical evidence was immediately forthcoming.
A single E. coli cell contains no more than 10 or so copies of the lac repressor.
Direct chemical identification of 10 molecules in a population of millions of proteins and RNAs in a single cell presented a tremendous challenge.

In 1966, Walter Gilbert and Benno Mller-Hill reported the isolation of the lac repressor in partially purified form. 
To achieve the isolation, they used a regzllator quantity (Iq) mutant strain that contains about 10 times as much repressor as do wild-type E. coli cells.

Also instrumental in their success were the use of the gratuitous inducer, IPTG (Figure 18.4), which binds to the repressor, and the technique of equilibrium dialysis.
Using this technique, extracts of Iq cells were placed in a dialysis bag and allowed to attain equilibrium with an external solution of radioactive IPTG, which is small enough to diffuse freely in and out of the bag.
At equilibrium, the concentration of IPTG was higher inside the bag than in the external solution, indicating that an IPTG-binding material was present in the cell extract and that this material was too large to diffuse across the wall of the bag.

Ultimately the IPTG-binding material was purified; it was shown to be heat labile and to have other characteristics of a protein as well.
Extracts of I-constitutive cells having no lac repressor activity did not exhibit IPTG-binding activity, strongly suggesting that the isolated protein was the repressor molecule.

To demonstrate this further, Gilbert and Mller-Hill grew E. coli cells in a medium containing radioactive sulfur and isolated the IPTG-binding protein, which was labeled in its sulfur-containing amino acids. 
This protein was mixed with DNA from a strain of phage lambda which carries the lacO+ gene.
The DNA sediments at 40S, while the IPTG-binding protein sediments at 75.
The DNA and protein were mixed and sedimented in a gradient using ultracentrifugation.
If the radioactive protein binds to the DNA, then it should sediment at a much faster rate, moving in a band with the DNA.
This was found to be the case.
Further experiments showed that the IPTG-binding or repressor protein binds only to DNA containing the lac region. 
It w as also shown not to bind to lac DNA containing an operator-constitutive (Oc) mutation.

Crystallographic Analysis of the Repressor

Very recently, in 1996, Mitchell Lewis, Ponzy Lu, and their colleagues succeeded in determining the crystal structure of the lac repressor as well as the structure of the repressor bound to IPTG and to operator DNA.
The repressor monomer consists of 360 amino acids and functions as a homotetramer.
The tetramer can be cleaved with a protease under controlled conditions and yields five fragments.
Four are derived from the N-terminal ends of the tetramer and bind to operator DNA.
The fifth fragment is the remaining core of the tetramer, derived from the COOH-terminus-ends; it binds to lactose and gratuitous inducers such as IPTG.

The operator DNA that was previously defined by mutational studies (lacOc) and DNA sequencing analysis consists of 27 base pairs and is located 11 base pairs upstream from the start of the lacZ gene.
In the crystallographic studies, each tetramer binds to two symmetrical operator DNA helices.
Binding involves 21 of the 27 base pairs originally defined.
Except for the central base pair, the two antiparallel strands of the helix are palindromic, a characteristic common to other regulatory sites.
Binding by the repressor distorts the conformation of DNA, causing it to bend away from the repressor.
A generalized image of this binding is illustrated in the opening photograph at the beginning of this chapter (page 522).
In this depiction, an auxiliary operator region located 82 base pairs upstream from the lacZ gene is also bound, creating a "repression loop" of DNA.

These studies have also defined the three-dimensional conformational changes that accompany the allosteric transitions occurring during the interactions with the inducer molecules.
Many of the related findings demonstrate that the molecular mechanisms giving rise to the transitions are prototypes for similar transitions known to occur in eukaryotic systems.

The crystallographic studies bring us to a new level of understanding in the regulatory process occurring within the lac operon.
Remarkably, this current information has confirmed at the level of molecular visualization so many of the things that Jacob and Monod were able to predict in their model some 40 years ago based strictly on genetic grounds.

Figure 18.0

Model of the lac repressor bound to the DNA double helix representing the operator region of the lac operon

Figure 18.1

Organization of the gene cluster and regulatory units involved in the control of lactose metabolism

Figure 18.2

The catabolic conversion of the disaccharide lactose into its monosaccharide units, galactose and glucose

Figure 18.3

The structural genes of the lac operon in E. coli 

The three genes are transcribed into a single polycistronic mRNA, which is sequentially translated into the three enzymes encoded by the operon.

Figure 18.4

The gratuitous inducer isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG)

Figure 18.5

The components involved in the regulation of the lac operon and their interaction under various genotypic conditions, as described in the text

Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Genetic regulation in eukaryotes can occur at several levels, but transcriptional control is the primary mechanism controlling gene expression.
Transcription is modulated by the interaction of regulatory molecules with short DNA sequences most often located upstream from affected genes.
Posttranscriptional mechanisms involve the selection of alternative products from a single transcript and the control of mRNA stability.

The discovery of the operon in Escherichia coli by Jacob and Monod in 1960 was the first step in unraveling the mechanisms that regulate gene expression. 
While some of the principles of regulation found in the lac operon are also present in eukaryotes, it is clear that eukaryotes have evolved a more complex system of gene regulation.

In multicellular eukaryotes, cells of the pancreas do not make retinal pigment, nor do retinal cells make insulin.
In these organisms, differential regulation of gene expression is at the heart of cellular differentiation and function.
The question is, how does an organism express a subset of genes in one cell type, and a different subset of genes in another cell type?
At the cellular level, this regulation is not accomplished by eliminating unused genetic information; instead, mechanisms have evolved to activate specific portions of the genome, and to repress the expression of other genes.
Activation and repression of selected loci represents a delicate balancing act for an organism; expression of a gene at the wrong time, in the wrong cell type, or in abnormal amounts can lead to a deleterious phenotype, even when the gene itself is normal. 

In this chapter we will review the general features of eukaryotic regulation, outline the components needed to control transcription, and discuss how these components interact.
We will also consider the role of posttranscriptional mechanisms in regulating gene expression in eukaryotes.

Eukariotic Gene Regulation:

An Overview

Eukaryotic cells contain a much greater amount of genetic information than do prokaryotic cells, and this DNA is complexed with histones and other proteins to form chromatin.
Genetic information in enkaryotes is carried on many chromosomes (rather than one), and these chromosomes are en closed within a nuclear membrane.
In enkaryotes, transcription is spatially and temporally separated from translation.
The transcripts of eukaryotic genes are processed, cleaved, and ligated before transport to the cytoplasm.
The highly differentiated cells of enkaryotes often synthesize large amounts of a restricted number of gene products even though they contain a complete set of genetic information.

Regulation of enkaryotic gene expression can potentially occur at many levels (Figure 19.1).
- transcriptional control,
- processing of the pre-mRNA,
- transport to the cytoplasm,
- stability of the mRNA,
- selecting which mRNAs are translated, and
- posttranslational modification of the protein product
Most eukaryotic genes are regulated in part, at the transcriptional level.
In the following sections, emphasis is placed on transcriptional control, although other levels of control will also be discussed.
There are two main components of transcriptional control of gene expression:
short DNA sequences that serve as recognition sites, and regulatory proteins that bind to these sites.

Regulatory Elements and EuLaryotic Genes

The internal structure of eukaryotic genes was discussed in Chapters 12 and 17.

In addition, there are regulatory sequences adjacent to genes that control transcription.

These sequences are of two types:
promoters and enhancers (Figure 19.2).

These regulatory elements can be on either side of a gene, or at some distance from the gene, and are called cis regulators because they are found adjacent to the structural genes they regulate, as opposed to trans regulators (e.g., binding proteins), which are not adjacent to the genes they regulate.

Promoters

Promoters consist of nucleotide sequences that serve as the recognition point for RNA polymerase binding.
Such regions are called promoters, as they are in prokaryotes.
They represent the region necessary to initiate transcription and are located a fixed distance from the site where transcription is initiated.

Promoters are located immediately adjacent to the genes they regulate, and are considered to be a part of the gene.
Promoter regions are usually several hundred nucleotides in length.

Eukaryotic promoters require the binding of a number of protein factors to initiate transcription.
Promoters that are recognized by RNA polymerase II consist of short modular DNA sequences usually located within 100 bp upstream (in the 5' direction) of the gene.
The promoter region of most genes contains several elements.
The first is a sequence called the TATA box (Figure 19.3).

Located about 25 to 30 bases upstream from the initial point of transcription (designated as -25 to -30), it consists of an 8-base-pair consensus sequence (a sequence conserved in most or all genes studied) composed only of T = A pairs, often flanked on either side by G=C-rich regions.
Mutations in the TATA box severely reduce transcription , and deletions often alter the initiation point of transcription (Figure 19.4). 

Many promoters contain other components; one of these is called the CAAT box.

Its consensus sequence is CAAT or CCAAT, it frequently appears in the region -70 to -80 bp from the start site, and it can function in a 5'-3' or a 3'-5' orientation.
Mutational analysis suggests that the CAAT box is critical to the promoter's ability to facilitate transcription (Figure 19.4).
Mutations on either side of this element have no effect on transcription, whereas mutations within the CAAT sequence dramatically lower the rate of transcription.
A third modular element of some promoters is called the GC box, which has the consensus sequence GGGCGG and is often found at about position -110.
This module is found in either orientation and often occurs in multiple copies.

There is variation in the location and organization of sequences that comprise the upstream regulatory elements in eukaryotic genes (Figure 19.5).
Note that in different genes there are significant differences in the number and orientation of promoter elements and the distance between them.
In addition, eukaryotic genes use more than one form of RNA polymerase for transcription.
These are classified as type I (ribosomal RNAs), type II (mRNAs and snRNAs), and type III (tRNAs, 5S rRNA, and several other small cellular RNAs).
Each type of polymerase uses different sequences to recognize transcription factors that bind to the type I, type II, and type III promoters.

Enhancers

In addition to the promoter region, transcription of most, if not all, eukaryotic genes is regulated by additional DNA sequences called enhancers.

These regions interact with regulatory proteins and can increase the efficiency of transcription initiation or activate the promoter.

Thus, there is some analogy between enhancers and operator regions in prokaryotes.
However, enhancers appear to be much more complex in both structure and function.
Enhancers greatly stimulate the transcriptional activity of a promoter and can be distinguished from promoters by several characteristics: 

1. The position of the enhancer need not be fixed, it can be placed upstream, downstream, or within the gene it regulates.
2. Its orientation can be inverted without significant effect on its action.
3. If an enhancer is moved to another location in the genome, or if an unrelated gene is placed near an enhancer, transcription of the adjacent gene is enhanced.

Most eukaryotic genes are under the control of enhancers. 
In the immunoglobulin heavy chain genes, an enhancer is located in an intron between two coding regions.
In this case, the enhancer is located within the gene it regulates. 
It is also active only in the cells in which the immunoglobulin genes are being expressed, indicating that tissue-specific gene expression can be modulated through enhancers.

Internal enhancers have been discovered in other eukaryotic genes, including the immunoglobulin light-chain gene.
Downstream enhancers are found in the human beta globin gene and the chicken thymidine kinase gene.
In chickens, an enhancer is located between the beta globin and the epsilon globin genes and apparently works in one direction to control the epsilon gene during embryonic development and in the opposite direction to regulate the beta gene during adult life.
In yeast, regulatory sequences similar to enhancers, called upstream activator sequences (UAS), can function upstream at variable distances and in either orientation.
They differ from enhancers in that they cannot function downstream of the transcription start point.

Like promoters, enhancers contain modules composed of short DNA sequences.
The enhancer of the SV40 virus has a complex structure.
It consists of two adjacent 72-bp sequences located some 200 bp upstream from a transcriptional start point (Figure 19.6).
Each of the two 72-bp regions contains five sequences that contribute to maximum rates of transcription. 
If one or the other of these regions is deleted, there is no effect on transcription, but if both are deleted, in vivo transcription is greatly reduced.
This and other enhancers contain a copy of a sequence (ATGCAAATNA) that is found in both promoters and enhancers, but so far it has proven difficult to determine the basic unit of enhancer structure.

Promoter sequences are essential for transcription, while enhancers are not.

Enhancers are able to stimulate levels of transcription at a distance, whereas this is not true of promoters.
In addition, enhancers are responsible for tissue-specific gene expression.

As a group, promoters contain modules (the TATA box) that must be located at a fixed site upstream of the transcription start point; enhancers do not contain these modules.
Although enhancers and promoters share similar sequences, the sequences in enhancers are most often contiguous; in promoters, they are spaced apart.
On the other hand, both enhancers and promoters have some striking similarities:
They both have modular organization, with some modular sequences in common, and they both bind transcription factors.

The most intriguing question about enhancers is how they are able to exert control over transcription at a great distance from either promoters or the transcriptional start site.
As we will discuss in a later section, transcription factors bind to enhancers and alter the configuration of chromatin by bending or looping the DNA to bring distant enhancers and promoters into direct contact in order to form complexes with transcription factors and polymerases.
In the new configuration, transcription is stimulated to a higher level, increasing the overall rate of RNA synthesis.

Transcription Factors Bind to Promoters and Enhancers

As in prokaryotes, transcriptional control in eukaryotes involves interaction between DNA sequences adjacent to genes and DNA-binding proteins.
As outlined in Chapter 17, the regulatory sequences adjacent to a wide range of genes have been identified, mapped, and sequenced.
Development of DNA protection and gel retardation assays have allowed the detection of DNA-binding proteins in cell extracts, and new affinity chromatography techniques have been used to isolate transcriptional factors present in very low concentrations.
The result has been a virtual explosion of information about eukaryotic transcription factors.
This section will review some of this new information, including the upstream organization of eukaryotic genes, the characteristics of transcription factors, their interaction with DNA sequences, other regulatory factors, and the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase.

Proteins that are not part of the RNA polymerase molecule itself, but are needed for the initiation of transcription, are called transcription factors.
These proteins control where, when, and how genes are expressed.
Transcription factors are modular structures with at least two functional domains: 
one that binds to DNA sequences present in promoters and enhancers (DNA-binding domain), and another that activates transcription via protein-protein interaction (trans-activating domain).
Protein domains are clusters of amino acids that carry out a specific function.
This region binds to RNA polymerase or to other transcription factors.
The existence of separate domains in eukaryotic transcription factors was first demonstrated by genetic analysis of mutants in yeast.

Genetic Analysis of Transcription Factors

In yeast, genetic analysis has identified loci that encode the enzymes required for galactose metabolism.
Expression of the genes encoding these enzymes is regulated by the presence or absence of galactose.
In the absence of galactose, these genes are not transcribed.
If galactose is added to the growth medium, immediate transcription of the three genes commences, and the mRNA concentration of these transcripts increases by a thousandfold.
A mutation in the GAL4 gene prevents the activation of these genes in the presence of galactose, indicating that transcription is genetically regulated.

Transcription of the structural genes for galactose metabolism is controlled by a UASG (upstream activating sequence).
Recall that UASs are functionally similar to promoters and enhancers in higher eukaryotes.
Using recombinant DNA techniques, the Gal4 protein was found to bind to the UASG region, and to activate transcription of the genes for galactose metabolism, establishing that the GAL4 gene encodes a transcription factor. 

The GAL4 gene product is a protein of 881 amino acids, that includes a DNA-binding domain that recognizes and binds to sequences in the UASG, and a trans-activating domain that activates transcription.
These functional domains were identified by cloning and expressing truncated GAL4 genes and assaying the gene products for their ability to bind DNA and to activate transcription (Figure 19.7).
Because the protein contains two functional domains, it is possible to delete one of these regions, while the other remains intact and functional. 

A region at the N-terminus of the protein was found to be the DNA-binding domain (Figure 19.7).
Proteins with deletions extending from amino acid 98 to the C-terminus (amino acid 881) retained the ability to bind to the UASG region.
The DNA-binding domain is responsible for recognition and binding to the nucleotide sequence in UASG.
Similar experiments have identified two regions of the protein involved in activation of transcription:
region I, consisting of amino acids 148-196, and region II, encompassing amino acids /68-881 (Figure 19.7).

Constructs that contain the DNA-binding domain and region I (amino acids 1-96 and 149-196) or the DNA-binding domain and region II alone (amino acids 1-96 and 768-881) have reduced transcriptional activity.

The nature of the activating regions was explored by starting with a protein that contains the DNA-binding region and activating region I (GAL4 1-238) and isolating point mutations in region I that result in increased activation.
Most single mutations that increase activation produce amino acid substitutions that increase the negative charge of region I, and most cause a threefold increase of transcription.
A multiple mutant that contains four more negative charges than the starting protein causes a ninefold increase in transcriptional activation, and has almost 80 percent of the activity of the complete GAL4 protein.
However, negative charge alone is not responsible for the activating function; some mutants with decreased activity do not have fewer negative charges than the parental GAL4 1-938 molecule.

These results strongly suggest that activation involves direct contact between the activating domain of the transcription factor and other proteins.
How0 does this protein-protein contact activate transcription?
There are several possibilities, including stabilization of the binding between the promoter DNA and RNA polymerase, increasing the rate at which the double stranded DNA within the transcribed region is unwound, or attracting and stabilizing other factors which bind to the promoter or to the RNA polymerase.

An attractive candidate for an activator target is TFIID, a complex of several proteins that binds to the TATA sequence and is required for transcription.

TFIID consists of the TATA binding protein (TBP), and about 10 other proteins called TBP-associated factors, or TAFs (some of which are described in later sections).
The idea that TFIID is a target for activation is supported by the finding that some GAL4 constructs stimulate transcription in mammalian cell extracts and change the conformation of DNA-bound TFIID. 
In addition, other studies show that TBP alone can bind to the promoter, TAFS must be present for the complex to respond to activators.

Structural Motifs of Transcription Factors

The domains of enkaryotic transcription factors take on several forms.
The DNA-binding domains have distinctive three-dimensional structural patterns or motifs.
There are three major types of these structural motifs:
helix-turn-helix (HTH), zinc finger, and leucine zippers.
This classification is not exhaustive, and other new groups will undoubtedly be established as new factors are characterized.

The first DNA-binding domain to be discovered was the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif.
In prokaryotes, HTH motifs have been identified in the cro repressor (in the DNA-binding domain), the lac repressor, trp repressor, and other proteins (Figure 19.8).
Studies indicate that the HTH motif is present in many prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins.
This motif is characterized by its geometric conformation rather than a distinctive amino acid sequence.
Two adjacent or helices separated by a "turn" of several amino acids enables the protein to bind to DNA (and after which the motif is named).
In the cro repressor, one of the helices binds within a major groove containing six bases, while the other helix stabilizes the interaction by binding to the DNA backbone. 
Unlike several of the other DNA-binding motifs, the HTH pattern cannot fold or function alone, but is always part of a larger DNA-binding domain.
Amino acid residues outside the HTH motif are important in regulating DNA recognition and binding.

The potential for forming helix-turn-helix geometry has been recognized in distinct regions of a large number of eukarvotic genes known to regulate developmental processes.
Present almost universally in eukaryotic organisms and called the homeobox, a stretch of 180 bp specifies a 60-amino-acid homeodomain sequence that can form a helix-turn-helix structure.
Of the 60 amino acids, many are basic (arginine and lysine), and a conserved sequence is found among these many genes.
We shall discuss homeobox-containing genes in Chapter 20 because of their significance to developmental processes.

Zinc fingers are one of the major structural families of eukaryotic transcription factors, and they are involved in many aspects of gene regulation.

Zinc fingers were originally discovered in the Xenopus transcription factor TFIIIA.
This structural motif has now been identified in proto-oncogenes (Chapter 21), genes that regulate development in Drosophila (the Krppel gene, see Chapter 20), in proteins whose synthesis is induced by growth factors and differentiation signals, and in transcription factors. 
There are several types of zinc finger proteins, each with a distinctive structural pattern.

One such zinc finger protein contains clusters of two cysteine and two histidine residues at repeating intervals (Figure 19.9). 
The consensus amino acid repeat is Cys-N2-4-Cys-N12-14-His-N3-His. 
The interspersed cysteine and histidine residues covalently bind zinc atoms, folding the amino acids into loops known as zinc fingers.
Each finger consists of approximately 2 3 amino acids, with a loop of 12 to 14 amino acids between the Cys and His residues, and a linker between loops consisting of 7 or 8 amino acids.
The amino acids in the loop interact with and bind to specific DNA sequences.
Studies have shown that zinc fingers bind in the major groove of the DNA helix and w rap at least part way around the DNA.
Within the major groove, the zinc finger makes contact with a set of DNA bases and may form hydrogen bonds with the bases, especially in G-rich strands.

The number of fingers in a zinc finger transcription factor varies from 2 to 13, as does the length of the DNA-binding sequence. 

A third type of domain is represented by the leucine zipper. 
First seen as a stretch of 35 amino acids in a nuclear protein in rat liver, four leucine residues are spaced seven amino acids apart, and flanked by basic amino acids.

The leucine-rich regions form a helix with leucine residues protruding at every other turn.
When two such molecules dimerize (Figure 19.10), the leucine residues "zip" together. 
The dimer contains two alpha helical regions adjacent to the zipper that bind to phosphate residues and specific bases in DNA, making the dimer look like a pair of scissors (Figure 19.10).

In addition to domains that bind DNA, recall that transcription factors contain domains that activate transcription.
These regions can occupy from 30 to 100 amino acids and are distinct from the DNA-binding domains.
These stretches of amino acids interact with other transcription factors (such as those that bind to the TATA sequence) or directly with the RNA polymerase. 

Overall, the picture of transcriptional regulation in eukaryotes is somewhat complex, but a number of generalizations can be drawn. 
The structural organization of chromatin and alterations in chromatin structure to allow binding of transcription factors are considered to be the primary levels of regulation.
The regulation of transcription by protein factors is largely positive, although transcription repressors are now being recognized as important components of gene regulation.
The binding of one or more factors at promoter regions is a prerequisite to transcriptional activation of a locus.

Promoter and enhancer sequences are recognized and bound by transcription factors.

Because of the modular nature of recognition sequences, different transcription factors may compete for binding to a given DNA sequence, or the same site may bind different factors in a cell-specific fashion.
For example, sequences in the TATA box and CAAT box can bind to transcription factors that recognize these modules.
Finally, because of the variability in the location and modular nature of promoters and enhancers, and the variety of transcription factors, an initiation complex (consisting of transcription factors and RNA polymerase II) can be constructed in a number of ways, all involving protein-protein interaction.
Despite this variability, it is possible to provide a general outline that describes how eukaryotic transcription factors operate, and in the next section we will consider a generalized model for the assembly of a transcription complex.

Assembling the Transcription Complex 

Some insights into the transcriptional apparatus of type II genes (those transcribed by RNA polymerase II) are now available and involve a series of transcriptional factors that are assembled at the promoter in a specific order.

To initiate formation of the apparatus, the TFIID complex binds to the TATA promoter via its TBP (Figure 19.11).
About 20 base pairs of DNA are involved in binding the TBP, and the other subunits bind to this protein.
This has been described as the commitment stage (Figure 19.12).
TFIID responds to contact with activator proteins by conformational changes that expedite the binding of TFIIA, TFIIB, and polymerase. 
Unlike the situation in prokaryotes where polymerase binds directly to the DNA promoter region, eukaryotic polymerases bind to transcription factor proteins that are in turn bound to the DNA promoter region.

At this point, transcription of the DNA downstream may ensue at a minimal basal level.
The final stage involves the achievement of the induced state, where transcription is stimulated above the basal level.
This state is not yet well defined, but involves other areas of the promoter region, enhancers, and numerous transcription factors, which control the assembly of the transcription complex and the rate at which RNA polymerase initiates transcription.
Factors bound to enhancers at a distance from the site are thought to interact with the transcription complex, looping out the DNA that separates the enhancer from the complex (Figure 19.13).

How Are Transcription Factors Controlled? 

Evidence that gene expression in eukaryotes can be regulated by effector molecules originating outside the cell was elegantly provided by Ulrich Clever and Peter Karl-son with their discovery that the steroid hormone ecdysone induces specific changes in the puffing pattern in polytene chromosomes (recall from Chapter 2 that puffs represent the transcription of specific genes). 
In eukaryotes, steroid hormones are used to regulate growth and development and to maintain homeostasis.
The major sex hormones are all steroids, as is vitamin D.
The homeostatic adrenal hormones (more that 30 different types) that regulate glucose metabolism and mineral utilization are also steroids. 

Figure 19.0

Molecular complex formed between the TATA box-binding protein (TBP), transcription factors TFIIA and TFIIB, and TATA box DNA during the initiation of transcription 

Figure 19.1

Various levels of regulation that are possible during the expression of the genetic material

Figure 19.2

Organization of typical eukaryotic gene and transcriptional control regions

The promoter region consists of modular DNA sequences, usually located within 100 to 110 bp of the site of transcription initiation.
Promoter elements usually consist of modular sequences.

Figure 19.3

The promoter in eukaryotic genes consists of several modular elements including the TATA box (-25 to -30 bp), the CAAT box (-70 to -80) and the GC box (at about -110)

Figure 19.4

Summary of the effects of point mutations on transcription of the B-globin gene

Each line represents the level of transcription produced by a single nucleotide mutation (relative to wild type) in the promoter region in a separate experiment.
Dots represent nucleotides where no mutation was obtained.
Note that mutations within promoter elements have the greatest effect on the level of transcription.

Figure 19.5

Upstream organization of several eukaryotic genes, illustrating the variable nature, number, and arrangement of controlling elements

- SV40 control region, with early genes to right, late genes to left.
- Thymidine kinase.
- Insulin gene.

Figure 19.6

DNA sequence for the SV40 enhancer

Screened sequences are those required for maximum enhancer effect:
The brackets below the sequence are the various sequence motifs within this region.

The two domains of the enhancer (A and B) are indicated. 

Figure 19.7

The GAL4 protein has three domains that participate in the activation of the GAL1 and GAL10 loci

Amino acids i-98 or 1-147 bind to DNA recognition sites in UASG.
Amino acids 148-196 and 768-881 are required for transcriptional activation.
GAL80 binding activity resides in the amino acid region 851 -881.

Figure 19.8

A helix-turn-helix or homeodomain where three different planes of the a helix of the protein are established

These domains bind in the grooves of the DNA molecule.

Figure 19.9

A zinc finger, where cysteine and histidine residues bind to a Zn++ atom, looping the amino acid chain out into a finger like configuration

Zinc finger domains are common in many DNA regulatory proteins.

Figure 19.10

A leucine zipper, where dimers result from leucine residues at every other turn of the a helix in facing stretches of two polypeptide chains

When the a-helical regions form a leucine zipper, the regions beyond the zipper form a Y-shaped region that grips the DNA in a scissors-like configuration.

Figure 19.11

Molecular complex formed between the TATA-box binding protein (green) and the 8 base-pairn TATA box of DNA (red), itself part of DNA (yellow)

Figure 19.12

The assembly of transcription factors required for the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase 11

The first factor binds to the TATA box, and then TFIIA binds, forming a complex with the TATA factor and the DNA. 
The next factors, TFIIB and TFIIA, bind before RNA polymerase 11.
The polymerase binds to the transcription factors through protein-protein interactions.
Before transcription begins,factors E, H and J bind, and transcription then begins from the initiation site at + 1.

Figure 19.13

DNA looping allows factors that bind to enhancers at a distance from the promoter to interact with regulatory proteins in the transcription complex and to maximize transcription
