
Footprints of evolution

By definition, the evolutionary origins of the human genome, and all genomes, are as old as life itself.
The present chapter is not intended as an introduction to basic evolutionary theory or an overview of molecular evolutionary genetics per se .
As a result, many fascinating areas are not covered, such as the idea that RNA used to be the primary information molecule before being superseded by DNA or the idea that the genetic code was initially a doublet code before evolving into the familiar triplet code, etc.
The interested reader is advised to consult one of the more general molecular evolutionary genetics textbooks.
Instead, the present chapter is meant to focus on how comparative analyses of present day genomes have shed light on the evolutionary origin of human DNA.
Much of the data are derived from comparisons of mammalian genomes, although comparison with more distant genomes is occasionally used to explain certain footprints of evolution , as in the origin of mitochondrial DNA and introns.
A final section considers our uniqueness when compared with mammalian models, notably the mouse (an important model for understanding early human development and also human disease) and primates, our closest living relatives.

Evolution of the human mitochondrial genome

The human mitochondrial genome probably originated following endocytosis of an aerobic eubacterium and subsequent large-scale gene transfer to the nuclear genome

The organization of the human mitochondrial genome is radically different from that of the nuclear genome.
Instead, it and the mitochondrial genomes of other animal cells have several features in common with most prokaryotic genomes: small size, absence of introns, a very high percentage of coding DNA, a conspicuous lack of repeated DNA sequences and comparatively small prokaryotic-like rRNA genes.
Phylogenetic analyses of rRNA sequences suggest that mitochondria are particularly closely related to the a subdivision of purple bacteria.

Consequently mitochondria are believed to have originated as a result of endocytosis by anaerobic eukaryotic precursor cells of an aerobic eubacterium (most likely a purple bacterium) with an oxidative phosphorylation system.
According to the socalled endosymbiont hypothesis , this event most likely happened when oxygen started to accumulate in significant quantities in the Earth's atmosphere, probably about 1.5 billion years ago.
At that time, the precursors to eukaryotes were simple anaerobic cells.
The change to a progressively aerobic atmosphere provided a strong selection system for previously anaerobic cells to acquire the capacity for oxidative phosphorylation.
The endocytosis of a suitably respiratory bacterial cell provided, therefore, a strong advantage for anaerobic eukaryotic precursor cells:
by subverting the bacterial oxidative phosphorylation system they were able to promote their own rapid growth and evolution in the oxygen-containing atmosphere.

The size of the human mitochondrial genome (16.6 kb) and those found in other animal cells (typically less than 20 kb) is, however, much smaller than those of many bacterial genomes, such as the 4.6 Mb genome of E., coli .
It is probable, therefore, that most of the genes donated by the eubacterial endosymbiont were gained by the nuclear genome;
the mitochondrial genome presumably retained only a very small number of the eubacterial genes, including the core rRNA and tRNA genes, and a few of the many genes which encode components of the oxidative phosphorylation system.
This would explain why present-day mitochondria are so heavily dependent on the products of nuclear genes (which are translated on cytoplasmic ribosomes before being imported into the mitochondria).

Figure 9.1

The human mitochondrial genome probably originated following endocytosis of an aerobic prokaryote and subsequent large-scale gene transfer to the nuclear genome 

Although initially the engulfed aerobic prokaryote was capable of independent protein synthesis, over long evolutionary time scales most of its genes were transferred into the nuclear genome.
This left a small remnant genome which is now only able to synthesize rRNA, tRNA and a few of the proteins of the oxidative phosphorylation system (Oxphos).
The great majority of mitochondrial proteins, including mitochondrial enzymes, the proteins of mitochondrial ribosomes and most of the oxidative phosphorylation system proteins, are specified by nuclear genes, synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes and imported into the mitochondria.

The mitochondrial genetic code most likely evolved as a result of reduced selection pressure in response to a greatly diminished coding capacity

The human mitochondrial genetic code is slightly different from the 'universal' genetic code that is used in the expression of polypeptides encoded by prokaryotic genomes, eukaryotic nuclear genomes and plant mitochondrial genomes.
In addition, although it is identical to the genetic codes of other mammalian mitochondrial genomes, it shows some differences to the nonuniversal genetic code in the mitochondria of other eukaryotes, such as Drosophila and yeast cells.
Most probably, the evolution of the altered mitochondrial genetic codes arose in response to the progressive loss of coding potential by gene transfer from the original endosymbiont's genome to the nuclear genome; the resulting tiny mitochondrial genome in animal cells specifies the synthesis of only a few types of polypeptide (13 in the case of human mitochondria).
The original bacterial endosymbiont would have been expected to display the universal genetic code.
However, once most of its coding capacity was transferred to the nuclear genome, there would have been less selection pressure to conserve the original code - slight altering of the otherwise universal genetic code could be achieved without provoking disastrous consequences because only a tiny number of polypeptides were involved.
It is also likely that the codons which have been altered have not been used extensively in locations where amino acid substitutions would have been deleterious. 
In contrast, there is a huge selection pressure to conserve the universal genetic code in large genomes, such as the nuclear genome - even slight alterations could result in lack of function or aberrant function for large numbers of vitally important gene products, resulting in cell death.

Evolution of the human nuclear genome: genome duplication and large-scale chromosomal alterations

In many ways the human nuclear genome is typical of those found in the cells of complex multicellular eukaryotes, such as mammals.
The overall genome size is large, a parameter which, with some notable exceptions, parallels the complexity of the organism.
It contains a large fraction of noncoding DNA sequence whose significance is mostly obscure.
In addition, a high proportion of both the coding and noncoding DNA is repetitive.
In contrast, present day bacterial genomes are very much smaller - the size of the E., coli genome is barely 1/1000 of that of a typical mammalian genome - and they have little noncoding DNA or repeated DNA sequences. 
The evolution of complex multicellular organisms can therefore be expected to have involved a progressive increase in genome size.
Different mechanisms are likely to have contributed to the large increase in genome size, including rare duplications of the whole genome ( tetraploidization ) and a variety of frequent subgenomic duplication events resulting from different genetic mechanisms including unequal crossover, unequal sister chromatid exchange and slippage replication .
In each case, the increase in genome size must have been accomplished without initially compromising the functions of the original DNA set.

Instead, by providing additional DNA, subsequent mutations could result in comparatively rapid sequence divergence:
at each duplicated gene locus, one gene is surplus to requirements and so can diverge rapidly because of the absence of selection pressure to conserve function.
In a few cases, such diverged genes may acquire novel functions which could be selectively advantageous.
In most cases, however, the additional gene sequences would be expected to acquire deleterious mutations and degenerate into nonfunctional pseudogenes.

Figure 9.2

Gene duplication can lead to the acquisition of novel function or the formation of a pseudogenes. 

Duplication of gene A results in two equivalent gene copies.
Selection pressure need be applied to only one gene copy (top) to maintain the presence of the original functional gene product.
The other copy (bottom), will continue to be expressed but, in the absence of selection pressure to conserve its sequence, will accumulate mutations (vertical bars) relatively rapidly.
It may acquire deleterious mutations and become a nonfunctional pseudogene which may continue to be expressed at the RNA level for some time, but which will eventually be transcriptionally silent ( xxx A).
In some cases, however, the mutational differences may lead to a different expression pattern or other property that is selectively advantageous ( xxx ).
In the case of tandem gene duplication, subsequent sequence exchanges between the two copies (by mechanisms such as unequal crossover, see pages will act as a brake on the rate of sequence divergence between the two gene copies.

Human genome evolution may have involved ancient genome duplication events, but the evidence has been obscured by subsequent chromosome and DNA rearrangements 

Genome duplication is an effective way of increasing genome size and is responsible for the extensive polyploidy of many flowering plants.
It can occur naturally when there is a failure of cell division after DNA duplication, so that a cell has double the usual number of chromosomes.
Human somatic cells are normally diploid.

However, if there is a failure of the first zygotic cell division, constitutional tetraploidy can result.
Tetraploidy can be harmful and is often selected against.

However, some animals, such as particular species of fish, are naturally tetraploid and it is quite feasible, therefore, that in the distant evolutionary past ancestral cells did undergo genome duplication events.
In this way, an initially diploid cell could have undergone a transient tetraploid state; subsequent large-scale chromosome inversions and translocations, etc., could result in chromosome divergence and restore diploidy, but now with twice the number of chromosomes.

If ancient tetraploidization events were rare in the evolution of the human genome, much intragenomic DNA shuffling would have occurred since the last such event.

This means that the original evidence for tetraploidization events would be largely obscured by subsequent chromosomal inversions, translocations, etc.
Additionally, traces of gene duplication following genome duplication are likely to be reduced by silencing of one member of each duplicated gene pair which then degenerates into a pseudogene.
After hundreds of millions of years without any function, the nonprocessed pseudogenes generated following the last proposed genome duplication would have diverged so much in sequence as to be not recognizably related to the functional gene, even assuming they have not been lost during occasional rearrangements leading to gene deletion.

At low banding resolution, certain pairs of nonhomologous human chromosomes (e.g. chromosomes 1 and 2) show apparent similarities in banding patterns which were initially suggested as evidence of ancient tetraploidy.
However, the evidence for such conclusions has not been supported by subsequent high resolution chromosome banding studies.
Another approach has been to identify common chromosomal locations of nonallelic genes that are obviously related.
Such genes may be related in sequence (members of a gene family) or in function (participation in common biochemical pathway, receptor-ligand relationships, subunits of same protein, etc.).

Using this approach, various groups of related nonhomologous chromosomes have been suggested in the human genome, representing so-called paralogous chromosome segments Possibly the most significant evidence for paralogous chromosome segments comes from comparisons of chromosomes 12 and 17 (HSA12 and HSA17 - from Homo sapiens ).
These two chromosomes contain two of the four human HOX clusters of homeobox genes.
Homeobox genes are believed to play a crucial role in establishing the anterior-posterior axis during development and, because of their fundamental importance to embryonic development, have been very strongly conserved throughout evolution. 
Other mammals also have four HOX clusters and the linear order of the genes in a cluster is thought to dictate the temporal order in which they are expressed during development and, also their anterior limits of expression along the anterior-posterior axis.
The close similarity of the four clusters extends to clear identification of paralogous HOX genes, that is genes which occur on different clusters but which are more closely related to each other than they are to their neighbors.
A single such HOX cluster exists in Amphioxus , with very close similarities to the mammalian HOX gene clusters.
As Amphioxus is thought to be the closest invertebrate relative of the vertebrates, the vertebrate ancestor may have had a single such cluster.
During vertebrate evolution either successive duplications of the HOX gene cluster occurred, or possibly one or two rounds of tetraploidy contributed to the formation of the existing four clusters.
Similar chromosomal locations suggest that the non-I integrin xxx chain genes (which mediate a variety of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions) appear to have evolved in parallel with the HOX gene clusters in a co-ordinated fashion, presumably because of close proximity to the HOX genes in the ancestral cluster.

Figure 9.3

Genome duplication can lead to a transient tetraploid state before chromosome divergence restores diploidy.

Following duplication of a diploid genome, each pair of homologous chromosomes (e.g. chromosome 1 ) is now present as a pair of identical pairs.
The resulting tetraploid state, however, can be restored to diploidy by chromosome divergence, e.g. by an interstitial deletion (upper panel, a), a terminal deletion (lower panel, c) or by an inversion (b).

Table 9.1

Paralogy, orthology and homology 

Paralogy means close similarity of nonallelic chromosomal segments or DNA sequences within a species , indicative of a close evolutionary relationship which may or may not have pre-dated speciation.
For example, the two different human xxx -globin genes are paralogous. 
Different degrees of paralogy can be identified in a DNA sequence family with more than two members.
For example, although all 38 human HOX genes are clearly related and so to some extent can be considered as parálogos, there is an especially close structural and functional relationship between specific genes in the four clusters.
As a result, in the HOX gene family, the term paralogous is customarily confined to sets of particularly related genes.

Orthology means close similarity of chromosomal segments or DNA sequences between species .
For example, the major human sex-determining gene is SRY and its ortholog in mouse is the Sry gene.
In gene families with closely related members in a species, it may be difficult to recognize true orthologs between species.

Homology was initially used to describe the relationship of allelic chromosomal segments.
Since then it has been widely used in a loose sense to signify any type of relatedness indicative of a common evolutionary origin, whether within or between species.

There have been numerous major chromosome rearrangements during the evolution of mammalian genomes

In addition to whole genome duplication, a variety of different subgenomic DNA duplication events are possible, resulting from exchanges between nonhomologous chromosomes (chromosomal translocations), unequal exchanges between homologous chromosomes or the sister chromatids of a single chromosome (page 255), and DNA copy transposition events.
Clearly, some of these mechanisms can also result in loss of genetic material.
In addition, other mechanisms (chromosome inversions, simple DNA transpositions and balanced translocations) can result in no net gain or loss of material. 
Mammalian genome evolution appears to have involved frequent subgenomic duplications and also rearrangements without net loss of DNA.
In the human genome, for example, strong evidence exists for large paralogous regions on the two arms of chromosome 1 and to a lesser extent on the different arms of several other chromosomes.
The assumed large-scale duplications could have resulted from ancestral whole chromosome duplications by Robertsonian fusion or subchromosomal duplications followed by pericentric inversions .

Comparisons of the present-day genome organization of humans and other mammals also suggest that large-scale rearrangements may have been frequent, and that karyotype and phenotype evolution can be uncoupled.
For example, the Indian muntjak deer ( Muntiacus muntjak ) has only three types of (very large) chromosome, whereas its very close relative, the Chinese muntjac deer ( Muntiacus reevesi ), has 23 different chromosomes. 
The human and mouse karyograms are quite different from each other and even the highly conserved X chromosome linkage group shows numerous differences in organization between the species.
The great apes are extremely closely related to humans but show clear cytogenetic differences as a result of several inversions, a translocation that has occurred exclusively in the human lineage and another that has occurred in the gorilla lineage.
Old World monkeys are also closely related to humans but, with the exception of the gibbons, numerous chromosome rearrangements have occurred since divergence from the human lineage.

Figure 9.4

xxx and xxx appear to have paralogous chromosomal segments.

The approximate positions of some of the related genes mapping to human chromosomes 12 and 17 are indicated.
The lengths of the bars marks the maximum uncertainty about the position of any member of a cluster;
probably most are in fact closely clustered.
Note that the aldehyde dehydrogenase gene xxx gene has been mapped only broadly to chromosome 17 but is clearly related to the xxx gene on xxx 

Figure 9.5

The organization of HOX gene clusters in mammals and Amphioxus suggests the possibility of one or two rounds of ancestral genome duplication.

Indicated paralogous groups consist of genes with very similar expression patterns and presumably similar functions. 
At the time of writing, 10 HOX genes had been isolated in Amphioxus , the invertebrate considered to be most closely related to vertebrates.
The equivalent genes in Drosophila were presumably organized on a single cluster in an ancestral genome prior to a translocation which resulted in the Ultrabithorax ( Ubx ) and Antennapedia ( Antp ) clusters.
The vertebrate ancestor presumably had 13 HOX genes but loss of individual genes following cluster duplications has led to each of the mammalian HOX clusters lacking one or more of the original genes.

Boxes group genes with clearly related homeoboxes.

Figure 9.6

Gene mapping on human chromosome 1 suggests the presence of large duplicated regions on the two arms.

Vertical bars mark the approximate chromosomal locations of mapped genes.
Paired sets are as follows: TRN, xxx and TRNL, xxx like; TRE, xxx and xxx , xxx -like; xxx , small nuclear xxx RNA and xxx , small nuclear xxx RNA pseudogenes 1-4; xxx , adenylate kinase 2 and xxx , guanylate kinase 1; xxx and xxx , glutamic-oxaloacetic acid transaminase xxx like sequences 1 and 2; xxx and xxx , ferritin heavy chain-like sequences 1 and 2; xxx and xxx , coagulation factors III and V; xxx /B, xxx , complement xxx 2, complement xxx -binding protein, complement component receptors 1/2. 

The Human Genome Project

History, organization and goals of the Human Genome Project

The Human Genome Project is an international project whose ultimate aim is to obtain a complete description of the human genome by DNA sequencing.
As the human mitochondrial genome has already been completely sequenced, the genome under investigation is the nuclear genome.
Because of the scale of the effort involved, it represents biology's first 'big science' project.

The Human Genome Project was conceived out of the need for a large-scale project to develop new mutation detection methods

A workshop held in Alta, Utah, in December 1984 was a major catalyst in the development of the Human Genome Project.
Sponsored partially by the US Department of Energy (DOE), the workshop was intended to evaluate the current state of mutation detection and characterization and to project future directions for technologies to address current technical limitations.
The growing roles of novel DNA technologies were discussed, notably the emerging gene cloning and sequencing technologies. 
Although such technologies had been in operation for about a decade, the efforts of individual laboratories to try and clone and characterize one gene at a time were considered to be wasteful of scientists' time and research resources.
Because of the perceived technical obstacles, a principal conclusion was that methods were incapable of measuring mutations with sufficient sensitivity, unless an enormously large, complex and expensive program was undertaken.
A subsequent report on Technologies for Detecting Heritable Mutations in Human Beings sparked the idea for a dedicated human genome project by the DOE, and in March 1986 it sponsored an international meeting in Santa Fe, New Mexico, to asses the desirability and feasibility of ordering and sequencing DNA clones representing the entire human genome.
Virtually all participants concluded that such a project was feasible and would be an oustanding achievement in biology.

After extensive discussions with the US scientific community, the DOE responded to the Santa Fe meeting by issuing a Report on the Human Genome Initiative in the spring of 1987.
Three major objectives were to be implemented:

- generation of refined physical maps of human chromosomes; 
- development of support technologies and facilities for human genome research;
- expansion of communication networks and of computational and database capacities.

As implementation of this program began with a small number of pilot projects, other US organizations initiated their own studies of policy and strategy.
In 1988, two additional widely circulated reports from the US Office of Technology Assessment and National Research Council appeared, and the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) set up an Office of Human Genome Research (later re-named the National Center for Human Genome Research) to co-ordinate NIH genome activities in co-operation with other US organizations.
In the same year, the US congress officially gave approval to a 15-year US human genome project commencing in 1991.
The required funding was estimated to be about $3 billion.

Organization of the Human Genome Project

The US Human Genome Project remains the major contributor to international research in this area.
The co-ordination of this project has been entrusted to both the DOE (Offices of Energy Research and of Health and Environmental Research and Human Genome Program) and the US Department of Health and Human Services [Public Health Service, National Institutes of Health (NIH) and National Center for Human Genome Research].
The NIH clearly had a natural interest in the Human Genome Project, having been a major supporter of research into genetics and molecular biology.
In addition, the DOE was considered to have an important role to play, following on from its long-standing program of genetic research directed at improving the ability to assess the effects of radiation and energy-related chemicals on human health.
Recognizing their complementary activities, the NIH and DOE agreed to co-ordinate their individual genome activities. 
The NIH activity is largely channeled through the National Center for Human Genome Research, while DOE's genome activities are represented mainly by multidisciplinary programs underway at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. 

The Human Genome Project is now a truly international project and major pro grams have been established in the UK, France and Japan.
Following the US lead, national human genome programs have also been established in Europe by Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, the UK and the USSR (CIS), and also transnationally by the European Community.
In addition, the Nordic countries have proposed a co-operative genome initiative which would allow them to contribute jointly to the human genome mapping effort. 
Outside Europe and the US, national genome projects have been established in Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea and New Zealand. 
The Human Genome Organization (HUGO) was established to co-ordinate the different national efforts, facilitate exchange of research resources, encourage public debate and advise on the implications of human genome research.
Conceived in 1988, HUGO is now administered through three centers: HUGO Europe (London), HUGO Americas (Bethesda, USA) and HUGO Pacific (Tokyo).

The complete nucleotide sequence of the human genome is only one of several goals of the Human Genome Project

The major rationale of the Human Genome Project is to acquire fundamental information concerning our genetic make-up which will further our basic scientific understanding of human genetics and of the role of various genes in health and disease.
The major scientific thrust of the Human Genome Project concerns constructing high resolution genetic and physical maps as a prelude to the ultimate physical map, the complete sequence of the human genome.
Much of this work is being carried out in a few major genome mapping centers.
There is also extensive interaction with research focusing on mapping disease genes, which is currently conducted in numerous laboratories throughout the world.
The major 15-year goals also include a commitment to map and sequence the genomes of a variety of model organisms and to develop ancillary technologies including data analysis. 
Significant funding is also being provided for research on ethical, legal and social considerations, and support for technology transfer to the medical community.

At the outset of the Human Genome Project, it was clearly recognized that the DNA sequencing technology then available could not deliver the desired major goal (the complete sequence of the human genome in 15 years) within the budgetary constraints that were imposed.
Improvements in DNA sequencing technology have been steady rather than dramatic, so that DNA sequencing costs have fallen progressively but without a huge increase in sequencing efficiency.
At the time of writing, the largest regions of continuous human DNA sequence to be published were, with the single exception of a sequence in the TCR B gene cluster, less than 0.2 Mb long, although considerably longer DNA sequences have been sequenced in model organisms. 
As a result of the perceived limitations in sequencing technology, the initial emphasis of the project has been on building high resolution genetic and physical maps of the human genome rather than large-scale sequencing.
The latter is not expected to be undertaken until there are significant clone contigs spanning individual chromosomes.
Meanwhile, the progress of large-scale sequencing projects for certain model organisms has been monitored carefully in order to benefit from their experience prior to launching in to full-scale sequencing of the human genome. 
As a result of this experience, there is now some optimism that complete sequencing of the human genome may well be achieved ahead of the initial target date of 2005.

Figure 13.1

Major scientific strategies and approaches being used in the Human Genome Project.

The major scientific thrust of the Human Genome Project begins with the isolation of human genomic and cDNA clones (by cell-based cloning or PCR-based cloning).
These are then used to construct high resolution genetic and physical maps prior to obtaining the ultimate physical map, the complete nucleotide sequence of the 3000 Mb nuclear genome.
Inevitably, the project interacts with research on mapping and identifying human disease genes.
In addition, ancillary projects include studying genetic variation (the Human Genome Diversity Project; genome projects for model organisms and research on ethical, legal and social implications.
The data produced are being channeled into mapping and sequence databases permitting rapid electronic access and data analysis.
EST, expressed sequence tag; STS, sequence tagged site.

Table 13.1

Table 13.1: Fifteen-year goals of the US Human Genome Project

Construction of a high resolution genetic map of the human genome.


Production of a variety of physical maps of all human chromosomes, and of the DNA of selected model organisms, with emphasis on maps that make the DNA accessible to investigators for further analysis.


Determination of the complete sequence of human DNA and of the DNA of selected model organisms.


Development of capabilites for collecting, storing, distributing and analyzing the data produced.


Creation of appropriate technologies necessary to achieve these objectives.


Human genetic maps

The first human genetic map was published in 1987 and was based on RFLP markers

Classical genetic maps for experimental organisms such as Drosophila and mouse have been available for decades, and have been refined continuously.
They are constructed by crossing different mutants in order to determine whether the two gene loci are linked or not.
For much of this period, human geneticists were envious spectators, because the idea of constructing a human genetic map was generally considered unattainable.
Unlike the experimental organisms, the human genetic map was never going to be based on genes because the frequency of mating between two individuals suffering from different genetic disorders is vanishingly small.
All this left was the possibility of a genetic map based on polymorphic markers which were not necessarily related to disease or to genes.
As long as the markers showed mendelian segregation and were polymorphic enough so that recombinants could be scored in a reasonable percentage of meioses, a human genetic map could be obtained.
The problem here was that, until recently, suitably polymorphic markers were just not available.

Classical human genetic markers consisted of protein polymorphisms, notably blood group and serum protein markers, which are both rare and not very informative.
By 1981, only very partial human linkage maps could be obtained, and then only in the case of a few chromosomes.
The identification of abundant DNA-based polymorphisms, however, called for a radical revision of thinking, and the early 1980s saw serious discussion of the possibility of constructing a complete human genetic map for the first time.
Botstein et al. ( 1980) argued that it was feasible to construct a complete linkage map of the human genome using RFLPs.
The desirability of a complete linkage map of the human genome was clear.
- gene localization - any gene for which a polymorphism could be typed could immediately be placed on the genetic map, and its chromosomal localization obtained.
From the medical viewpoint, this had great appeal:
linkage analyses could be employed in families segregating a disease gene, enabling the genes for many inherited conditions to be mapped for the first time.

- Gene cloning - gene localization would provide starting points for efforts to clone genes (see positional cloning ).

- Diagnosis- prenatal or pre-symptomatic diagnosis of inherited disease genes by linkage analysis would be facilitated enormously by having many DNA markers in the vicinity of the disease locus.



Almost inevitably, the realization that a comprehensive human genetic map was now attainable sparked serious efforts to construct one.
In 1987 the first such map was published based on the use of 403 polymorphic loci, including 393 RFLP markers.
This was a massive undertaking:
the study required typing each member of 21 three-generation families for each polymorphic locus and analyzing the results by computer-based linkage analyses.
The results provided 23 linkage groups (linear arrays of linked markers) corresponding to the 22 autosomes and the X chromosome (a genetic map can be constructed for the major pseudoautosomal region on the Y chromosome but not for the rest of the Y chromosome, which does not engage in recombination). important though this achievement was, there remained some serious drawbacks by comparison with the features that one would wish to see in an idealized genetic map (see Table 13.2).

The average spacing between the markers ( xxx 10 cM) was still considerable.
More significantly, a major limitation was the reliance on RF7LP markers, which are not very informative markers and are difficult to type.

High resolution human genetic maps have been obtained recently largely through the use of microsatellite markers

The next breakthrough in constructing a human genetic map came as a result of the use of markers that were very much more polymorphic than RFLP markers.

Hypervariable minisatellite polymorphisms could be considered as an alternative, but only in a limited way.
This is so because they are not distributed widely throughout the genome; 
they have a marked tendency to occur near the telomeres. 

Microsatellite markers (also described as short tandem repeat polymorphisms , or STRPs ) have the advantage of being abundant, dispersed throughout the genome, highly informative and easy to type.
By focusing on this type of marker, researchers at the Généthon laboratory in France were able quickly to provide a second-generation linkage map of the human genome.

This tour de force involved selecting suitably polymorphic CA/TG repeats, mapping them to specific chromosomes by typing panels of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids and performing statistical linkage analyses on markers from individual chromosomes.
A total of 813 markers, of which 605 showed a heterozygosity above 0.7, were organized into 23 linkage groups.

The major advance by the Généthon laboratory was made possible by large-scale funding from the French muscular dystrophy organization Association Française Myopathique (AFM) which enabled a factory approach to research, using large-scale automation.
Subsequently, maps have been produced with ever increasing numbers of genetic markers, especially microsatellite markers, and ever increasing resolution. 
A variety of different genetic maps (using different marker sets) have been constructed.
The problem with this is twofold.
First, not all genetic maps have used the same sets of reference families.
Secondly, different genetic markers have been used to construct different genetic maps and the linkage relationship between markers in different genetic maps may not be known.
- reference families . The most widely distributed set of reference families is that deriving from the CEPH (Centre d'Études du Polymorphisme Humaine) collaboration of more than 100 independent laboratories.

- Integration of maps. Studying the linkage relationship between markers used in different genetic maps provides an integrated map.
The most recently published genetic map is such an example, and has about 4000 STRPs (mostly derived from the Généthon laboratory) plus 1800 other markers, mostly RFLPs, which together provided an average marker density of one per 0.7 cM.



The resolution of the map published by Murray et al. (1994) was considerably higher than the average 2-5 cM resolution hoped for by the end of the first 5 years of the project.
However, further advances in map resolution will be limited because of the poor returns involved in identifying novel microsatellite markers;
recently discovered microsatellite markers often turn out to be identical to previously characterized markers.
Additionally, there is a widespread perception that the current marker resolution is sufficient to provide the framework for constructing a comprehensive physical map of the human genome.
The latest genetic map to be published represents the last version of the Généthon map, and the major effort has recently switched to the construction of high resolution physical maps of the human genome.

Table 13.2

Towards an ideal genetic map 

Marker density.
The average spacing between polymorphic markers should be considerably less than 1 cM, so that virtually all regions of the genome will contain a marker in their immediate vicinity.

Marker typing.
Each marker should be easy to type, and the information and facilities to enable the typing should be widely, available.

Marker utility.
The heterozygosity of each marker (see text) should be high, preferably approaching 1.0.
This would mean that each marker would be informative in a large percentage of different meioses.

Marker order.
The utility of the genetic map is clearly dependent on confidence that the sequential order of markers in a linkage group is correct.
Genetic linkage analyses cannot provide absolute certainty concerning marker order.
Instead, a statistical approach is used which gives an odds ratio in favor of a certain order.
The confidence in marker order depends on finding as many recombinants as possible. 
For a high resolution map, this means scoring large numbers of informative meioses.

Reference families.
A single set of reference families should be used;
samples from each member of the reference families used to construct the map should be widely available, so that different laboratories could place new markers on the map and continue to improve it.

Map utility.
New markers should be integrated into a single map whose resolution would continue to improve;
different genetic maps using different sets of markers should be avoided.

Physical maps of the human genome

A variety of different physical maps of the human genome are being constructed

Like the genetic map, a physical map of the human genome will consist of 24 component maps corresponding to the 24 different types of chromosome.
The different genetic maps of the human genome that have been assembled so far all represent the same concept: sets of linked polymorphic markers (linkage groups) corresponding to different chromosomes.
However, unlike this uniformity, a variety of different types of physical map are possible.
In a sense, the first physical map of the human genome was obtained when cytogenetic banding techniques were used not only to distinguish the different chromosomes, but also to provide discrimination of different subchromosomal regions (see the human karyogram).
Although the resolution of this map is coarse (an average sized chromosome band in a 550-band preparation contains xxx 6 Mb of DNA), it has been very useful as a framework for ordering the locations of human DNA sequences by chromosome in situ hybridization techniques.

Other maps have been obtained by mapping natural chromosome breakpoints (using panels of somatic cell hybrids containing fragments derived from translocation and deletion chromosomes), or by mapping artificial breakpoints using radiation hybrids (RHs).
Again, however, the resolution achieved by such hybrid cell panels (the average distance between neighboring breakpoints) can be quite limited for large parts of the genome. 
As a result, higher resolution physical maps are desirable. 
Clearly, the physical map which will provide the highest possible resolution, that of single base pairs, is the ultimate map: the complete nucleotide sequence of the genome.
As this will not be achieved for some time, attention has been focused on constructing physical maps of intermediate resolution.
Comprehensive RH maps and rare-cutter restriction maps have been achieved thus far for only a few human chromosomes.
One example is chromosome 21 where a Notl restriction map has been published for the entire long arm.
In addition, much of the current mapping effort is aimed at mapping of coding DNA sequences, thereby producing comprehensive transcription maps .

Table 13.3

Different types of physical map can be used to map the human nuclear genome

Type of map.
Examples/methodology.
Resolution.


Cytogenetic.
Chromosome banding maps.
An average band has several Mb of DNA .


Chromosome breakpoint maps.
Somatic cell hybrid panels containing human chromosome fragments derived from natural translocation or deletion chromosomes.
Monochromosomal radiation hybrid (RH) maps.
Whole genome RH maps.
Distance between adjacent chromosomal breakpoints on a chromosome is usually several Mb.
Distance between breakpoints is often many Mb.
Resolution can be as high as 0.5 Mb.


Restriction map .
Rare-cutter restriction maps, e.g. Notl maps.
Several hundred kb.


Clone contig map.
Overlapping YAC clones.
Overlapping cosmid clones .
Average YAC insert has several hundred kb of DNA .
Average cosmid insert is 40 kb.


Sequence-tagged site (STS) map.
Requires prior sequence information from ordered clones so that STSs can be ordered.
A desired goal is an average spacing of 100 kb.


Expressed sequence tag (EST) map.
Requires cDNA sequencing then mapping cDNAs back to other physical maps.
Highest possible average spacing is xxx 40 kb.


DNA sequence map.
Complete nucleotide sequence of chromosomal DNA.
1 bp.


Figure 13.2

Several types of physical map are being constructed for human chromosomes.

The figure shows integration of several physical maps for the long arm of human chromosome 21.
Next to the standard cytogenetic map on the left are the positions of chromosome 21 breakpoints observed largely from studying chromosome 21 translocations (6;21, 4;21, 3;21, 2;21, etc.).
The STS map is shown twice to facilitate comparisons with the other maps, which also include the genetic linkage map of Chumakov et al. (1992), the PFGE-based Notl restriction map and the radiation hybrid map (measured in centiRays after exposure to 8000 rad).
