
GENETICS OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

The genetic organization and control of the immune system demonstrates several genetic phenomena that are shown less clearly or not at all by other systems: extensive polymorphism, linkage disequilibrium, an obvious evolutionary relation-ship between its various components, and, especially, a unique system of encoding great diversity within relatively few loci .
The genes of the immune system not only are clinically important in relation to transplantation, autoimmune disease, and response to infection and as causes of a number of single-gene disorders, but they also provide excellent models for the analysis of human variation and gene expression.
The application of molecular techniques has greatly expanded the understanding of the immune response while at the same time revealing new layers of complexity that remain to be explored.

Higher organisms are unique in their ability to distinguish between "self" and "nonself" and to mount a reactioI1 selectively against a very broad spectrum of foreign antigens.
This reaction is mediated by the complex interactive network of cells and cellular cytokines of the immune system and is referred to as the immune response .
Genetic factors play a key role not only in the generation of the normal immune response but also in the development of aberrant immune reactions and consequent immune-mediated disease.
In this chapter we describe the genetic basis of the immune response and discuss a number of single-gene disorders of the immune system as well as diseases in which immune-related genes, such as those of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), contribute to but do not exclusively encode disease susceptibility.

The discussion here is not intended to provide a comprehensive review of immunology or immunogenetics, for which the reader is directed to the General References listed at the end of the chapter.
Rather, we introduce some of the gene systems that govern immune function, and we reinforce the concept that, with the exception of monozygotic twins (or other multiple births), each person is genetically unique.
Much of human immunological uniqueness depends on the expression of the genes of the MHC, and thus in the discussion that follows we highlight this gene system, as well as two others within the same super-family that encode additional key components of the immune response: immunoglobulins (Igs) and T-cell antigen receptors (TCRs).

THE MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX 

The xxx is a complex locus , composed of a large cluster of genes located on the short arm of chromosome 6 (Fig. 14-1).
On the basis of structural and function al differences, these genes are categorized into three classes, each of which is highly complex and polymorphic.
Two of the three classes, class I and class II, correspond to the human leukocyte antigen ( xxx ) genes, originally discovered by virtue of their importance in tissue transplantation between unrelated individuals. 

The class I genes ( xxx , xxx , and xxx ) encode antigens that are an integral part of the plasma membrane of nucleated cells.
These antigens not only are involved in transplant rejection, but are also critical to immunocompetence and are intricately involved in antigen recognition, lymphocyte interactions, and the development of self-tolerance.
A class I antigen consists of two polypeptide subunits, a heavy chain encoded within the xxx and a nonpolymorphic polypeptide, B2-microglobulin, which is encoded by a gene outside the xxx , mapping to chromosome 15.

The class II locus is composed of several sub-regions that encode the xxx and xxx antigens.
These molecules are expressed primarily on B lymphocytes, macrophages, and activated T lymphocytes, but under certain conditions they may be expressed by other cell types as well.
Each class II molecule is a heterodimer, composed of a and ,B subunits, both of which are encoded by the MHC.
Like the class I antigens, they are integral to the cell membrane and to immune cellular interactions and function.
The xxx class I and class II antigens play a critical role in the initiation of an immune response and specifically in the "presentation" of antigen to T lymphocytes, which cannot recognize and respond to antigen unless it is complexed with an xxx molecule. 

The class III genes are not HLA genes but include genes for proteins such as properdin factors B, C2 and C4, which are part of the complement system, a series of polymorphic serum proteins and membrane receptors closely involved in immune function. 
Also in this region are genes that when defective cause single-gene diseases, such as the gene for 21-hydroxylase; deficiency of 21-hydroxylase is associated with one form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 10).
Thus class III genes appear to be functionally distinct from class I and class II genes, and they are not considered further here.

A number of other gene loci within the xxx are genetically linked to the xxx genes but are functionally unrelated to them.
These include the genes for tumor necrosis factor and lymphotoxin, as well as other genes, more recently isolated, for which a function remains to be defined.

There is a striking similarity, both in organization and in DNA sequence, between xxx class I and class II genes and between the HLA genes and the immunoglobulin and T- cell receptor genes de - scribed in the following sections.
The similarity among these genes and a number of others has led to their classification into a gene family designated the immunoglobulin gene superfamily (see later discussion).
The members of the family appear to be evolutionarily related genes, whose products serve a wide variety of functions beyond the immunological role of xxx molecules and immunoglobulins. 

Figure 14-1

A schematic of the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p, xxx 

Polymorphism and the Inheritance of HLA Haplotypes

The xxx system is highly polymorphic.
Numerous distinct antigenic variants have already been recognized at each of xxx and xxx .
Table 14-1 indicates the complexity and extensive polymorphism of the system.
Each person inherits one variant of each of the xxx subgroups from each parent.
According to the current system of xxx nomenclature, not all these antigenic variants (specificities) are direct products of single genes ; some, particularly variants of the xxx and xxx subgroups, are localized to subregions of genes, to a particular chain or to an AB combination. 

HLA typing, classically performed by using sera of multiparous females, has revealed considerable variation in the profile and frequency of xxx variants among different populations. 
HLA, for example, is among the most frequent xxx specificities in all populations, whereas xxx is found in Caucasians but not in Blacks or Asians.

The xxx alleles on a given chromosome are so closely linked that they are transmitted together as a haplotype.
The alleles are codominant; each parent has two haplotypes, expresses both, and, as shown in Figure xxx , transmits one or the other to each child.
As a result, parent and child share only one haplotype, and there is a 25 percent chance that two sibs inherit matching xxx haplotypes.
Because acceptance of transplanted tissues largely correlates with the degree of similarity between donor and recipient xxx haplotypes (and ABO blood groups), the favored donor for bone marrow or organ transplantation is an xxx compatible and HLA-compatible sibling of the recipient.

The xxx haplotypes show marked linkage disequilibrium (see Chapter 8).
Certain haplotypes are much more frequent than expected, whereas others are exceptionally rare, and most of the 3 X 107 phenotypic combinations theoretically possible among Caucasians have never been observed.
Sometimes the search for a suitable bone-marrow donor is unsuccessful in spite of a wide search.
There is also a striking ethnic distribution of haplotypes, in addition to the ethnic distribution of single xxx markers mentioned earlier.

Table 14-1

Antigens of the xxx System

Figure 14-2

The inheritance of xxx haplotypes

Usually a haplotype is transmitted, as shown in this figure, as a unit.
In extremely rare instances, a parent will transmit a recombinant haplotype to the child.

HLA and Disease Association

With the increasing delineation of xxx alleles has come an appreciation of the association between certain diseases and specific xxx antigens or haplotypes.
As is apparent from Table 14-2, most of these disorders are autoimmune-that is, associated with an immune response apparently directed against one or more self-antigens.
The strongest xxx disease association known is that between narcolepsy and xxx ; almost 100 percent o narcolepsy patients express this class II antigen in comparison with only about 16 percent of healthy controls.
However, only a small percentage of persons with xxx develop narcolepsy, and the relative risk of narcolepsy in those people, in comparison with people who do not have xxx , is only 34 (see footnote of Table 14-2). 
There is also a very strong association between: xxx and ankylosing spondylitis, a chronic inflammatory disease of the spine and sacroiliac joints.
Whereas only 5 percent of Caucasians in general B27-positive, at least 90 percent of Caucasians with ankylosing spondylitis are B27-positive.
The risk of developing ankylosing spondylitis is at least 90 times higher for people who have HLA-B27 than for those who do not.
Similarly, Reiter disease and reactive arthritis, conditions that closely resemble ankylosing spondylitis, are also strongly associated with the B27 antigen.
A further example is the association of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with HLA- DR3 and xxx , especially with HLA-DR3/ xxx heterozygosity.

The etiological relevance of most of the xxx disease associations remains obscure.
In most cases, the association is related to the immune response and does not depend on physical proximity of a disease-causing gene to the xxx loci . 
Two exceptions, however, are the autosomal recessive disorders primary hemochromatosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency, in which the defective genes do lie within the xxx .
Analysis of the various 21-hydroxylase mutations responsible for adrenal hyperplasia has revealed that different mutations at this locus originally occurred on different haplotype backgrounds and have remained in linkage disequilibrium with these specific haplotype markers. 
The hemochromatosis gene has not yet been isolated but is very closely linked to the xxx locus .

Even though the basis of most xxx disease associations is unknown, the evidence to date suggests that the xxx genes are not solely responsible for susceptibility to specific diseases but do predispose to certain diseases, along with other genetic or environmental factors.
As the xxx molecules are integral to T-cell antigen recognition., it is speculated that their role in disease pathogenesis may relate to differences in the capacity of these polymorphic proteins to interact with antigen and the T-cell receptor in the initiation of an immune response (Fig. 14-3).
This hypothesis, which implies a direct pathogenetic role for the HLA molecule, is supported by the finding, described in some detail in Chapter 15, that the association between xxx and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is related to a single amino acid change in one of the external domains of the xxx chain.
However, the precise mechanism whereby this substitution confers disease susceptibility is still unknown.

Table 14-2

Examples of Association Between xxx Antigens and Disease

IMMUNOGLOBULINS

Antibodies are immunoglobulins that are elicited in response to a stimulus by a foreign antigen and can recognize and bind that antigen and facilitate its elimination.
They are mediators of the immune response in the HLA-related diseases just described, as well as in response to foreign antigens.

A number of genetic diseases are due to deficiencies of immunoglobulins (Table 14-3).
However, the primary significance of immunoglobulins from the perspective of genetics is that they exhibit a unique property, somatic rearrangement , by which genes of the germline are rearranged in somatic cells to generate diversity.

Antibodies exist in two forms: a membrane-bound form, on B lymphocytes, and a soluble or secreted form.
Secreted antibodies are produced by plasma cells, which are derived from B lymphocytes by proliferation and maturation.
This process, known as B-cell activation, is initiated by interaction between a specific antigen and a suitable antibody molecule on the B-cell membrane.
Such an interaction results in the clonal expansion and differentiation of the B cell, with consequent formation of both plasma cells, which secrete antibodies specific for the inciting antigens, and memory B cells capable of responding promptly and strongly to any later challenge by the same antigen.

Immunoglobulin Structure and Diversity 

One of the most puzzling issues of immunogenetics used to be the mechanism whereby a seemingly infinite number of different antibodies could be encoded in the germline DNA of any one individual. 
It is estimated that each human being can generate a repertoire of about 108 different antibodies, yet the genome is composed of only 3 X 109 base pairs of DNA.
This seeming disparity has been reconciled by the demonstration that antibodies are encoded in the germline by a relatively small number of genes that, during B-cell development, undergo a unique process of somatic rearrangement and recombination that allows for the generation of enormous diversity.
The potential to create such huge numbers of different antibodies appears to have evolved as a mechanism for protection against the large array of environmental infectious organisms, toxic agents, and autologous malignant cells to which a person may be exposed.

Ig molecules are composed of four polypeptide chains, two identical heavy (H) chains and two identical light (L) chains, that are held together by interchain disulfide bonds (Fig. 14-4). 

Intrachain disulfide bonds subdivide each chain into a series of homologous domains.
On the basis of structural differences at the carboxyl terminal portion, the H chains are subdivided into five classes or isotypes, xxx and E, and the corresponding Igs are accordingly named xxx and xxx .
As indicated in Table 14 -4, the different xxx classes differ functionally as well as structurally. 
The L chains of immunoglobulin molecules may also be of two types, K and G), but not both in the same antibody.
Therefore, the anti-body produced by a single B cell contains only a single H-chain isotype and a single L-chain subtype.
Moreover, unlike other autosomal loci , within a single cell only one of the pair of parental alleles for each H-chain is expressed: either the paternal or the maternal allele, but not both.
The same is true for each L-chain.
These phenomena, known as isotypic exclusion and allelic exclusion , respectively, are still not fully understood.

Table 14-3

Examples of Single-Gene Disorders of the Immune System

Table 14-3

Schematic representation of the interaction be tween an xxx molecule, foreign protein, and T-cell receptor

Each H and L chain of an xxx protein consists of two segments, the constant (C) and the variable (V) regions. 
The constant region, which determines the class of the xxx molecule, is located at the carboxyl terminus, and its amino acid sequence is relatively conserved among xxx of the same class.

By contrast, the V region is located at the amino terminus and its amino acid sequence shows wide variation among different regions.
The V regions of the H and L chains form the antigen-binding site and determine the antibody specificity. 

The genes encoding the H and L chains are located in three unlinked chromosomal regions.

The K L-chain genes are on chromosome 2 at band xxx , the L-chain genes are on chromosome 22 at band xxx , and the H-chain genes, for all five isotypes, are on chromosome 14 at band xxx .

Each H and L chain is encoded by multiple segments that are widely separated in the germline.

The L-chain V-region domain is encoded by V and joining Q) segments, whereas the H-chain V region is encoded by three gene segments: the V and J segments and a third unit, the diversity (D) segment (Fig. 14 - 5).
In total, each cluster of Ig genes spans many millions of base pairs.

During B-cell differentiation, the DNA at the immunoglobulin loci undergoes somatic rearrangement.
For the light chains, a single V segment and a single J segment are juxtaposed, with loss of the intervening DNA, to form a complete variable region gene.
For the heavy chains, a D segment and a J segment are juxtaposed and then combine with a V segment.
Thus as shown schematically in Figure 14-6, generation of a K light chain involves a recombination that juxtaposes one of the many VK segments to one of the JK regions.
This rearranged segment is then transcribed, and the intervening sequences between the JK and CK segments are removed by RNA splicing to generate a mature mRNA for translation into a specific K light chain. 
The 1 light chain undergoes a similar process of rearrangement before transcription but has a somewhat different germ- line organization; there are fewer V segments, and the V and J segments are each associated with a different CA segment (Figs. 14 - 5 and 14 - 6).
Even greater diversity can be generated at the H-chain gene locus because of the additional use of one of multiple D segments in the formation of the H- chain variable region (Fig. 14-5).

In addition to the diversification possibilities provided by the recombination of multiple germline gene segments, somatic point mutation within the V-region genes provides another important mechanism for great expansion of the potential repertoire of antibody specificities.

Figure 14-4

Basic structure of an immunoglobulin molecule, consisting of two identical light chains and two identical heavy chains

Each chain consists of a variable region (V) and a constant region (C).
NH2 xxx = amino terminus.
CO2H xxx carboxyl terminus.

Table 14-4

Immunoglobulin Classes and Their Functions

Figure 14-5

Structure of the immunoglobulin gene clusters

Coding and noncoding regions are not drawn to scale.
The exact number of genes and the overall size of the gene clusters is not known.
