
A Wild Surmise 

John Keats didn't know anything about computers, and he wasn't much on history, either.
He evidently thought Cortez discovered the Pacific Ocean, when in fact it was Balboa.
But in a poem written 180 years ago, Keats captured the essence of what the newcomer experiences when confronted with the Internet.
Listen to him as he compares a translation of Homer by George Chapman to that first glimpse of the Pacific: 

Much have I travelled in the realms of gold, and many goodly states and kingdoms seen; round many western islands have I been which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.

Oft of one wide expanse had I been told That deep-browed Homer ruled as his demesne; yet did I never breathe its pure serene till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold: then felt I like some watcher of the skies when a new planet swims into his ken; or like stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes he stared at the Pacific-and all his men looked at each other with a wild surmise-

Silent, upon a peak in Darien [1] .

A wild surmise indeed.
To realize at the revelation of the Pacific that there was yet another ocean to cross must have struck early explorers with the force of thunder.
In the late twentieth century, the sensation Keats so exquisitely depicts is alive and well, thanks to computer networking.
The Internet, a worldwide, interconnecting, communicating amalgam of more than sixteen thousand networks, between fifteen and twenty million users, and a growth rate that makes attempts to quantify it in print necessarily obsolete, inspires just that sense of awe [2] .
The moment you run your first Telnet session, logging on to a remote computer, or use FOP to retrieve a file from another continent, you know the boundaries that separate us are being redefined.

But how do you know what to do?
Unlike commercial on-line services, the Internet provides few pointers.
Most users, logging on through a UNIX-based service provider, work with a cryptic prompt as simple, and in some ways as profound, as a Japanese watercolor's brushstroke.
You can make your modem take you around the world in seconds, retrieving files, reading mail, subscribing to electronic journals, using remote databases, but you have to know where you're going and the commands you'll need once you're there.
That's what this book is about-it's a guide to navigating the Internet, assembled with the dial-up user in mind.

DESTINATIONS YOU HAVEN'T THOUGHT OF 

There can be no all-inclusive printed directory of the Internet.

Those who write about this globe-spanning network are destined to labor forever behind the technological wave.
Simply put, the Internet is changing so rapidly, with so many new databases, services, addresses, and projects, that it can't be neatly encapsulated in any one set of commands or maxims.
The more you use the Internet, the more you will realize that each day is itself a learning process.

Each discovery leads to another, for the Internet is self-referential.
A casual reference on a BITNET mailing list may point to a hitherto unknown resource on a computer halfway across the country.
A file on that computer may remind you of the existence of a USENET newsgroup which, once subscribed to, updates you on new Internet services.
You will seldom find yourself exactly where you planned when you embark on an Internet voyage.

This book will construct a set of strategies that will allow you to get started.
It provides mapping to put you in the neighborhood of your destination, just as early maps of the New World sketched out the coast of Cuba, or Hispaniola, or Virginia, but left it to later cartographers to refine their work.
Even today, maps are continually being fine-tuned as more precise methods of measurement are developed.
So too on the Internet, new directories are coming into being that attempt to solve the problem of locating resources-the InterNIC, or Internet Network Information Center, is but one such attempt; the InterNIC will be explored in subsequent chapters.

Let me make one point clear at the outset.
Some of the destinations you read about in this book will have subtly changed by the time you try to access them.
Perhaps a login command has been replaced with another, or a sign-on sequence now sports a new menu.
In some cases, the service itself may have moved to a new address.
Such changes can be harrowing to the newcomer, but if you follow the principles outlined in this book, you should be able to understand what has happened and to proceed.
Above all, realize that you must be both attentive and creative in your dealings with a network as powerful, and elastic, as the Internet.

INTERNET ECHOES FROM ALL OVER 

There are thousands of Internet destinations.
Network links remain largely a phenomenon of the developed world, but even Eastern Europe, South America, and Africa are beginning to sprout network nodes.
Traffic on Internet mailing lists regularly reveals addresses from countries only now establishing their connectivity, and the clear benefits of network access in terms of tying together the academic communities of developing areas ensures this trend will only accelerate.
After a short time on-line, you begin to take international connectivity almost for granted.

A newsgroup on the USENET network, called misc.test , exists so that people who send test messages don't tie up the daily reading of newsgroups with greater content.
A number of sites around the world monitor this newsgroup, and if you send a test message on it, you'll receive a set of replies, letting you know your message was indeed received and where.

When I posted a test message on misc.test , the replies began immediately.
The first was from the University of Zurich in Switzerland.
Next was Ingres Corporation in Alameda, CA, acknowledging reception of my two-line message "General Test."
After that was a Free-Net in Youngstown, OH; Free-Nets provide community services and offer Internet gateways to their local audience.
I heard from a site in Lyon, France, as well as Harper Community College in Palatine, IL.
Lund, Sweden responded, and so too did Network Architecture Consulting, a firm in Fremont, CA.
I received mail from a commercial site in Hollywood, CA (just below the Hollywood sign, said the message), and from the University of Natal in Durban, South Africa.

The Internet crosses borders and oceans with daredevil ease.
There is no greater challenge to a parochial outlook than a day or two monitoring message traffic in this ongoing worldwide conversation.

VIA THE INTERNET TO THE ASTEROIDS 

What seems outlandish when you begin your Internet journeys becomes commonplace with experience.
Yet in all the time I've been making these voyages, I've never lost a sense of wonder at the bounty available on the network.
Take images, for example.
You'll find plentiful files in a variety of formats and subject matter, ranging from museum exhibits on the Vatican library to photographs of landscapes and people.
One of my favorite sites is a NASA archive containing imagery from agency missions, including photos of Jupiter, Venus, and the Space Shuttle.

An asteroid named Toutatis, for example, made a close pass to the Earth on December 8, 1992, closing to within 2.2 million miles.

NASA's Deep Space Network site in Goldstone, CA, bounced radar off the asteroid, creating a set of images which can be retrieved on-line.
By using the Internet procedure known as anonymous FOP, you can log on to the computer at this site (its Internet address is explorer.arc.nasa.gov ) to download this material.
There is also a text file, toutatis.txt , which presents the captions for these photographs.
Figure 1.1 shows the images.

Whether you're interested in photos from Viking, Voyager, Magellan, or a host of other astronomical vistas, NASA'S site is bound to contain what you're looking for.

FOP, as you'll quickly learn, is a primary tool for Internet exploration.
Using FOP, dial-up users can move into remote computers, change directories ad examine their contents, and transfer copies of their holdings to their service provider's computer.
From there, they can download the files they've chosen onto their own hard disks.
We'll go through the procedures for FOP and use it frequently to retrieve documents as we build an Internet file library.

FINDING A MAP OF FINLAND 

When my son needed a topographical map of Finland for a school report, it seemed a simple enough project, but the problem was time.

It was too late to head for the library.
Fortunately, I recalled a computer site in Finland - gatbo.uwasa.fi at the University of Vaasa-that maintained GIF files.
GIF is a format used to encode many of the images found on the Internet (the Toutatis pictures discussed earlier were downloaded as GIF files, and then run through a file viewer for presentation).
Could the computer at Vaasa help?

FOP is fast.
Enter the appropriate commands and you're there before you know it.
Searching through the directories in Finland, I found a directory called pc/gif.
Moving to it, I requested a listing of its contents, selected a file called suomi.gif , and moved it to the computer I dial in to here in Raleigh, NC.
I then downloaded it to my PC and printed a copy on my laser printer.
Problem solved.
The map is shown in Figure 1.2.

SOFTWARE IN PROFUSION 

Multiply the number of FOP sites around the world by the number of available files and you quickly realize there is software out there by the gigabyte, waiting to be accessed.
There are collections of shareware and public domain software, not to mention text files on a wide variety of subjects, so extensive as to boggle the mind.

Looking for telecommunications programs, I turned to the huge archive at Washington University in St.
Louis, at the address wuarchive.wustl.edu .
Like the Finnish computer, this site is accessible by anonymous FOP.

Figure 1.3 shows a screen from a recent visit to Washington University.
It may give you some idea of the scope of the contents there.

Figure 1.3

A map of Finland, direct from the source

Note that each of these entries has a name, listed on the far right.

There's a section on PostScript, one on the communications program Qmodem, one on security, and one on spreadsheets.
At the far left, you'll see that each entry is marked with the letter d.
Every entry so marked is itself a directory, containing an abundance of software.
We are looking at a single, tiny corner of a vast software archive.
It is but one of many such archives on the Internet.
The tools that help you track down just the file you need are covered later in this book.

MY KINGDOM FOR A NETWORK 

Recalling details from texts you read long ago is difficult for those not blessed with an acute memory.
So, when a friend and I recently fell into a discussion about Shakespeare, and he quoted the famous line "My kingdom for a horse!," we began trying to remember the surrounding lines.
The play, Richard III , features one of history's most controversial monarchs, characterized by Shakespeare as a scoundrel, but now undergoing a rehabilitation in some quarters.
What did Shakespeare have him say in that famous scene on Bosworth Field as his kingdom fell apart around him?

A Gopher at wiretap.spies.com provided the answer.
There, the complete works of Shakespeare are available on-line.
Gopher is a program that allows you to make simple menu choices to find information; Gopher also allows you to search the files you are looking through for specific information.
In Figure 1.4, we see the result of going to the wiretap.spies.com site, calling up Richard III , and searching under the words kingdom for .
As you can see, Gopher has taken us right to the lines in question.

Figure 1.4

Part of Shakespeare's Richard III discovered with a Gopher

TRACKING WHITE HORSES PRESS RELEASES

Are you hoping to chase down the White House line on a particular issue?
The Internet offers several ways to do just that.
A number of USENET newsgroups distribute press releases.
Or you might want to receive them by electronic mail.
By sending e-mail to clinton-info@campaign92.org , I was able to request press releases on foreign policy.
The process was entirely automated; the computer at this address read the subject line of my incoming message- receive foreign policy -and knew this was a request to send press releases to my Internet address.
You can also specify releases on the economy, on social policy, even speeches by administration officials.
To receive a file explaining how to do all this, send mail to help@campaign92.org .

Maybe you want to track down older information.
The press releases are being archived at various sites.
At some sites, you can use a search engine called WAIS to fine-tune your search strategy.
We'll cover WAIS in Chapter 13.

Other sites allow you to sign on by anonymous FOP, just as we did previously when we looked for files, maps, and photographs.
You can join in the action too, by sending electronic mail to the White House.
The address is president@whitehouse.gov .
As you see, one of the strengths of the Internet is the variety of ways resources can be retrieved.

BURROWING INTO THE INTERNIC 

Is there any logic to the Internet?
It can be hard to find, for although resources may exist in profusion, they may be hidden from us by the proliferation of network sites.
That makes resource discovery a major theme of the network, and later chapters will cover the wide range of tools available.

Work is underway to assemble information in a central repository known as the InterNIC.
By using a program called Telnet to access the site rs.internic.net , we can look at the abundance the InterNIC has to offer.
Figure 1.5 shows some resources available by using the Internet tool called Gopher .

The InterNIC has just come on-line as this book is being written; it's sure to expand as users think of new information sources they'd like to see there.
A look even now, though, can answer many basic Internet questions.
As we proceed, I'll show you how to use Telnet procedures to make this connection.
Chances are the InterNIC will become a regular supply station as you continue your explorations.

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HIGH 

The advantage of Telnet is its range; you can use it to take the controls of computers worldwide.
Each machine you access will make different options available.
Some are full featured indeed, as in the case of the CARL System, the Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries' contribution to data proliferation.
Take a glance at the menu in Figure 1.6 and you'll realize how abundant the information is on this system.
I got there simply by entering a Telnet command: telnet pac.carl.org .

It's not a bad list-there are library catalogs, including government publications, as well as a range of databases and an on-line encyclopedia, among other entries.
The ERIC database of education resources is a frequently tapped source.
Some of CARL's services require an account, but many are available for public access.

Figure 1.5

The InterNIC offers Internet information through a variety of tools, including the easy-to-use Gopher

Figure 1.6

The Colorado Association of Research Libraries offers plentiful information sources

USENET IN AN EMERGENCY 

Shortly after an earthquake brought devastation to parts of Los Angeles on January 17, 1994, a new USENET newsgroup sprang into existence.
Literally within hours, the newsgroup, called alt.current-events.la-quake , had begun fielding inquiries from people anxious for information.

Two kinds of question were common: People from around the country needed to know what areas were hit the hardest, and whether their friends and loved ones were safe; and people in the disaster area, where communications were problematical, needed to know what was happening to surrounding areas.

USENET, a vast collection of ongoing discussions on virtually every topic under the sun, is ideal for conveying this kind of information.
Figure 1.7 shows you an example of the kind of traffic that occupied the early hours of the group.
Here, a North Carolinian is passing along information to those wondering whether the Calabasas region had been badly affected by the quake.
The trick to monitoring this kind of traffic is to know that a new newsgroup has been formed to carry it.
Fortunately, the news reader software we discuss in Chapter 11 automatically tells you about new groups and gives you the opportunity to sign on to them.

CHECKING OUT THE NEWS ON CAMPUS 

Throughout North America and, increasingly, around the world, universities are beginning to implement on-line services called Campus-Wide Information Systems, or CWIS.
It's easy to check in at many universities to see what's on the bill.
In addition to campus events, CWIS systems often include other information such as directories of students and faculty, dictionaries or encyclopedias, weather, sports, and news.
Figure 1.8 shows you the sign-on screen at MIT's TechInfo service.
I reached it by using the command telnet techinfo.nut.edu .

Figure 1.7

USENET helped people keep tabs on the January 1994 earthquake in Los Angeles

Figure 1.8

A look at happenings at MIT

ALL THE WAY TO THE SUPREME COURT 

Project Hermes is the result of efforts to make United States Supreme Court decisions available on-line.
A consortium involving Case Western Reserve University, EDUCOM, and the National Public Telecomputing Network is behind this new means of distribution.

Now, when a decision comes out, you can retrieve the full text of the Court's opinions minutes after release, at no charge.
The files are distributed over the Internet and BITNET, as well as the growing network of community computer systems called Free-Nets.
You can also have Court opinions mailed to you.

Figure 1.9 shows a sample of the opinions available in the ascii directory of the FTP site at ftp.cwru.edu .

TO NEW ZEALAND BY WAY OF USENET 

From Case Western Reserve in Cleveland, it's time to hop across the Pacific.
Intrigued since childhood with New Zealand, I used to try to keep up with Kiwi news by means of a shortwave receiver and Radio New Zealand, which was almost impossible to catch except at late hours.
Now I keep up by USENET, where a newsgroup called soc.culture.new-zealand carries on a lively discussion of topics related to the North and South Islands.
A major bonus of this newsgroup is the presence of one Alan Murray of the University of Canterbury in Christchurch.
The indefatigable Murray updates the list frequently with a digest of local news events drawn from his morning paper.

Figure 1.9

Supreme Court opinions are readily available on- line

ON-LINE TO ANCIENT GREECE 

Electronic books offer certain advantages over their hard-copy brethren.
While you can't hold them in your lap for idle browsing, they're nonetheless excellent for text searching.
Do you want to find every reference to fate in Sophocles Oedipus Trilogy?
With an ASCII text file of the material, it's a simple matter to load Sophocles' work into a text editor and use its find function to track down the word.
No wonder CD-ROMs full of text material are becoming common.
An electronic version of Roget's Thesaurus allows you to locate the word you need almost instantly.
An electronic encyclopedia makes it possible to search for cross-linkages between referenced citations.

Commonplace reference book suddenly spring into three-dimensional life.

Project Gutenberg, run by Michael Hart at Illinois Benedictine College in Lisle, IL, is an attempt to make ASCII texts of classic works available to as wide an audience as possible.
Using FOP, I frequently visit the archive site at mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu , heeding the system's request not to tap the service between 10 A.M. and 5 P.M. local time.
There, I can find and download documents from Paradise Lost to Aesop's Fables , from Alice in Wonderland to The Federalist Papers , along with recent references like the CIA World Factbook and The Hackers' Dictionary .
We'll examine Project Gutenberg, along with several other text projects, in Chapter 10.

A NICE DAY FOR NETWORKING 

The University of Michigan can help if you're looking for a weather forecast.
The Weather Underground is menu-driven, providing current weather information and forecasts in a strictly noncommercial setting.
Figure 1.10 illustrates the outlook for Seattle, WA, on a drizzly winter day in Raleigh, NC.
I accessed this by using Telnet to the site downwind.sprl.umich.edu 3000 .

Figure 1.10

Weather forecasts can be generated for just about anywhere.

BITNET AND THE OVERSTUFFED MAILBOX 

USENET isn't the only place to keep up with news.
BITNET can send information through gateways into the Internet and straight into your electronic mailbox.
Every day, when I sign on, I have messages about subjects I've culled from a list of thousands.
There are astronomy postings, physics musings and discussions, a genial argument about Anglo-Saxon poetry, and a wild and woolly debate about the future of the Internet and the National Research and Education Network.
And, every now and then, I receive messages about the formation of new lists, to which I can subscribe or not, as the inclination moves me.

NORWAVES is a new mailing list developed by four students in Norway who are working with the Norwegian Information Council through its NORINFORM press office.
Subscribers (subscriptions are free) will receive weekly news in English from Scandinavia.
The address is nwnews@nki.no .
Norway is but one of many countries you can follow on the network.

Through mailing lists, USENET newsgroups, and electronic mail itself, it's possible to keep abreast of news in just about any part of the world.
This will continue to develop as the Internet expands into the nations of Africa and South America.

By now, you should be getting the idea.
The problem with the Internet is its vastness; a description could start almost anywhere.

Every time you sign on, there are new services available and new databases to explore.
Mailing lists seem to pop up overnight, and with the current trend toward commercial use of the network, services like ClariNet and Msen Reuters News Service are turning your electronic mailbox into a digital newspaper, with stories chosen according to profiles you select.
On-line journals are changing the boundaries of the publishing industry, making retrieval of past issues as simple as querying the proper server computer.

Newsletters on a wide variety of subjects have begun to appear; their numbers can only increase.
Believe it or not, there's even an Internet radio program, available through the network itself.
And video isn't far behind.

THE INTERNET CATCH 

There's also a catch.
Many of the best resources for accessing and using the Internet are found on-line.
The development of the new InterNIC as a central repository for Internet materials ensures there will always be a place to turn when problems arise.
Across the Internet, there are lists of access providers, suggestions on how to use everything from e-mail to remote databases, tutorials, lists of frequently asked questions, newsgroups for beginners.
If you spend some time reading through just a fraction of this material, you will quickly become proficient at using the network.

The Internet catch: How do you learn what you need to know about the Internet?
You read the Internet materials that can help you.

How do you obtain the Internet materials that can help you?
You have to be on the Internet.

That's why I wrote this book.
I fumbled around making every mistake possible as I first tried to gain access to, then learn how to use, the Internet.
This is the book I wish I had had available to me when I began my first voyages.
If it can help you as you set sail, I will be gratified indeed.

CHAPTER ONE NOTES 

[1] "On First Looking into Chapman's Homer."
From The New Oxford Book of English Verse , chosen and edited by Helen Gardner.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1972.

[2] Tracking Internet growth is a full-time task in itself.
You will find much help in this endeavor at the InterNIC-the Internet Network Information Center, discussed in Chapter 2.
Another helpful source is Matrix News , a regular electronic magazine that tracks network growth statistics.
Information on how to gain access to this journal is provided in Chapter 2.

Signing On to the Internet 

To work with the Internet, you must remove the notion of one-stop shopping from your thinking.
True, you'll be dialing into a single telephone number to gain access to one computer as your first step.

At that point, however, all resemblances between the Internet and the commercial on-line services evaporate.
You will use your initial computer contact only as the first step in a worldwide journey, although it will always provide a useful home base, and it will be the site where your mail is delivered and stored, and where any files you choose to retrieve are stored.
You might consider your home directory on a service provider's computer the analog to Balboa's base camp.
From it, you have a glimpse of the broad Pacific.

Just a few years ago, Internet access for dial-up users was hard to acquire because there were few commercial providers.
Unless you already worked for a company with network access, or had a compliant friend who was willing to let you use his or her account, you were simply out of luck.
The Internet was for network users only, and the individual user with a standalone computer and modem was shut out.
A different kind of service had grown up for such people-the commercial networks such as CompuServe, GEnie, Prodigy, and DELPHI.

Dial-up users, it was assumed, would stay within those confines while the Internet served the networks.

Today, all that has changed, and a growing number of companies offering dial-up access have emerged.
Each of these companies lets you use computer space on their machines.
That space is your foothold on the network.
From there,you are in position to explore the worldwide Internet using whatever tools your provider offers.

These tools may vary slightly from place to place, but the basics remain the same.
The point is, you the individual user finally have a gateway to the network, and, as you'll see when you examine the list of providers, there's shortage of options.

DIAL-UP CONNECTIVITY AND THE CLIENT/SERVER MODEL 

Dial-up connections differ from a continuous on-line network presence.
Depending on your choice of service provider, the major Internet tools-electronic mail, File Transfer Protocol, and Telnet-are all available to the dial-up user.
What's not available are a number of programs called clients which run on computers with full network connections.
You can still use clients, but they have to be located on your service provider's computer, which does have a full network presence.
This restricts your use of clients to those available on the computer.

What are these clients? The client/server model operates this way: Clients programs request information from servers , which are programs running on other computers.
There are numerous clients in varying degrees of complexity.
A Macintosh user with full connectivity might use a client called WAIStation to gain access to a wide range of Internet databases.
The client makes the proc of data retrieval far more intuitive than it would otherwise be by providing a helpful interface that prompts the user what to do.

Clients like this are available, for computers ranging from MS-DOS and Windows machines to Sun work stations, from VAX computers to NeXT machines and Macintoshes.

Not all of these client programs are available to the dial-up user.

Because you and I are limited to placing a call via modem to our service provider's computer, we must use the clients available on that system .
In addition, we limited to those clients that can communicate with our computer over the telephone line.
There are such clients-they're referred to as terminal- based or character-based clients-and, in most cases, they perform very well.
We'll use a terminal-based client to explore the hypertext searching tool called World Wide Web , for example, and we will sift through gigantic amounts of network data using a client called archie .
We can explore all network capabilities with a terminal-based client, but the limitations of our connection to the network mean we won't have the snazzy graphic interface WAIStation and some other clients provide.

Public versus Private Clients 

A possible source of confusion arises over the difference between two types of clients-public and private.
A public client is one that has been made available for general use.
We'll take advantage of several of these as we discuss Internet resource discovery tools.

There is a public client, for example, at Thinking Machines Corporation that allows us to examine the same set of databases that the Macintosh-based WAIStation client does, though without the latter program's elegance and power.
This client is public in that it is not running on our local service provider's computer, but rather at a public site that we must acces by Telnet procedures.

You might, on the other hand, have a wide range of clients-I call them "private clients"-available on your service provider's machine.

Some clients, such as archie and WHOIS, are widely distributed and are likely to be found at your dial-in site.

That means you can launch a search using archie , for example, without first having to use Telnet to gain access to a remote computer offering archie services.
We'll discuss these options as we go, but be aware that if your service provider doesn't offer a client for a given service, I will list public sites that also make a client available.
This information will be especially necessary for those readers who choose DELPHI or BIX as their providers, since they rely on public sites for such clients.

TERMINAL EMULATION 

Why can't a dial-up customer run all available client software? The answer has to do with the nature of the connection.
When you place a call to a service provider, you won't necessarily know (unless you ask) what kind of computer you're dialing in to.
Whatever it is, your computer has to find some way of talking to it.
A mainframe computer, for example, is used to dealing with terminals, which are simply screens that reflect what the mainframe is doing; terminals offer only limited functionality.
You may hear such terminals referred to as dumb terminals because of this lack of processing muscle.
Such a terminal usually contains a video display unit, a keyboard, and the circuitry to communicate with the computer to which it is connected.
It can send what you type and display what the main computer returns.
Personal computers, on the other hand, offer greater processing power; they can be "smart" terminals.

The problem is, we can't use the smarts inside our desktop machines when we make this kind of connection.
Because we're not actually networked into the service provider's computer, it regards us as a terminal.
To get anything to happen, our computer must emulate a terminal so the remote host will know what's going on.
This process, called terminal emulation , is established through software settings.

Terminal emulation is a critical feature of good communications software.
It allows us, even as we pretend to be dumb terminals, to use some nonterminal features such as the ability to capture data and download files.
The network client programs examined in this book can all be accessed if you set your software to emulate VT100 (VT102 will work just as well), a terminal emulation mode tuned for Digital Equipment Corporation's computers, and widely used no matter where you go on the Internet.

Figure 3.1 shows the settings screen for Crosstalk for Windows 2.0, a popular communications program.
Note that the figure shows a menu for terminal emulators.

A wide range of emulators is available.
A familiar one is ANSI PC, which is commonly used to connect to bulletin board systems running on IBM-compatible platforms.
There are emulators for Digital Equipment Corporation's computers, from VT52 to VT320, as well as emulators for Hewlett-Packard, IBM, WYSE, and others.
You can't see the full list in Figure 3.1 because the menu has to be scrolled to display all the choices.

Figure 3.1

Crosstalk for Windows, terminal emulation choices from the Settings menu 

SIGNING ON A PERSONAL ODYSSEY 

Commercial access to the Internet has improved so dramatically in the past two years that newcomers will be startled to learn that there was a time when the process was excruciating, although many early treatments of the subject made it sound like a snap.
"Need access? Just ask your system administrator," they blithely said, assuming you wouldn't ask if you weren't already working on a network in the first place.
And indeed, if you were already on a network, the advice was sound.
Many people to this day don't realize they can connect through their work site and that, in such cases, a simple request is usually enough to get them up and running.

But it was a different story for anyone who was trying to log on by modem from a standalone computer.
For me, logging on to the Internet became something of a crusade, deepening into obsession as I continued to run into a stone wall.
Several years ago, I made the mistake of asking this question: "I work out of a home office.
I don't have Internet access and I don't have a system administrator.

What do I do?" I asked people in my area and looked for answers on various on-line services.
I peppered local bulletin boards for advice and called computer gurus in Research Triangle Park, pestering some poor souls for months.

The result?
"Try the universities," some said.
I called Duke, UNC, North Carolina State; access there was restricted and no one I spoke with knew how to get it.
Maybe if I was a student.
Unfortunately, my years at UNC had ended in the mid-1970s.
"Call some of the big corporations," I was told.
"Someone out there might be able to get you an account."
I didn't know what I was doing, but I began to make these calls.
Most people didn't know what I was talking about.
Those who did seemed incredulous that I would ask.
"Network connections are private," they said.

Network connections private? If that doesn't give you something to think about, what does?

The Internet is not CompuServe or Prodigy.
Lacking any central organization, the network has no billing address.
You can't make a phone call to a network office and say, "Sign me up."
You'll also get confused by the plethora of possibilities some of the people who are already on the network will tell you about.
"Do you want a full connection?" they'll ask, and you reply, "Sure," not understanding why you would want anything else.
"The best we can do is SLIP," you may hear.
SLIP?
What does it mean?
And why do these people I'm talking to have nothing better to offer?
Is SLIP some kind of restricted access?

It wouldn't be until CONCERT-CONNECT came along that I made my real plunge into the Internet.
CONCERT-CONNECT was a service provider which, among other options, made possible local dial-up access to the Internet.
It brought order into the North Carolina Internet scene by offering a flat rate per month, allowing you to log on to the computers at MCNC (formerly the Microelectronics Center of North Carolina, now known solely by its acronym, as are many computer organizations).
The flat rate was attractive, as were the services; not just USENET newsgroups, but FTP and Telnet as well; not just electronic mail, but the whole panoply of features that make the Internet so fascinating.

Today, CONCERT-CONNECT is gone.
In its place are a growing number of Internet service providers, each offering dial-up access.
Many also offer more advanced forms of network connection, including the aforementioned SLIP (which we'll discuss in this chapter), and other forms of direct links all the way up to high-speed dedicated T1 and T3 lines.
My new service provider is Interpath, a division of Capitol Broadcasting Corp., here in Raleigh.
Interpath is representative of the new breed of service provider, offering network connections to a great variety of customers from individual home users to the largest businesses.

What a change.
In every state, service providers are springing up; indeed, Internet access is becoming a growth industry, bidding fair to create a price war that will be followed by an inevitable period of consolidation.
For you, the individual or small business user, the good news is that prices are dropping across the board.

CONCERT-CONNECT once charged $175 per month for SLIP access; Interpath is now offering comparable service for $37.50, and regular dial-up access is cheaper still.
If it's a full-service access provider you're looking for, finding one will keep getting easier.
No provider in your area? There will be soon.

Even more options are appearing from the ranks of the commercial on-line services like CompuServe and DELPHI.
In fact, all of the major on-line services now offer some form of Internet connectivity, even if only a gateway that allows you to send and receive mail to and from the Internet.
DELPHI and BLS have moved aggressively to open full-access provisions.
America Online is beginning to widen its existing mail-only gateway with a host of new services including USENET newsgroups and access to the superb Internet interface and display tool called Gopher .
Watch for announcements from the other commercial services; Internet access is now the hottest ticket in town as the networks grow together into a true global matrix.

We will work our way up the access ladder to show you what options are available.
If you are already on the Internet, you won't need to read the following unless you just want to understand why your non-networked friends seem so impatient when you talk about what you do on the network.

USING A LOCAL BULLETIN BOARD 

The first misconception faced by Internet newcomers isn't about the Internet at all; it's about UNIX.
UNIX is an operating system that runs on computers at a wide variety of academic and research sites around the world.
Because of its built-in communications capabilities, it has been used for years to carry mail and move messages by way of a cooperative, wide-area network called UUCP.

USENET news, the bulletin-board-style messaging service covered in Chapter 11, grew up in this UNIX environment, and thus many novices assume UNIX is ipso facto the language of the Internet community.
USENET is often the first Internet reachable tool many novices encounter, usually through a local bulletin-board system (BBS) offering the capability of logging on to some or all of its newsgroups.

We now have two such bulletin boards in my area.
With either, you can log on and read USENET postings, responding to them as you please; you can also send electronic mail.
Figure 3.2 shows the sign-on screen for one such bulletin board, a Raleigh BBS called Computer Business System.
After calling its number, this is what is displayed after a brief log-in message.

Ah, the Internet Catch again.
Here we have a tool that will guide you into your first glimpse of the Internet, but in true UNIX fashion, it's cryptic.
You have to prowl around, in this case entering a ?, to find out what's available.
By working through the help system, the new user discovers how to access USENET newsgroups.

Figure 3.3 shows the section of the Help Menu that's applicable.

Figure 3.2

The sign-on screen from a BBS

Entering new at the prompt displays messages that have come in since your last login.
The read command will also suffice if you want to examine other messages.

The help message says we can change the message base by entering the number of the board at the main prompt, although how we learn which number to enter isn't yet clear.
The join command lets us add USENET newsgroups, and so on.
Note, too, that we're presented with mail options.
The other major form of connectivity that such bulletin boards provide is an electronic mail address for Internet access.

We could continue working through the menus, but it would be pointless to do so, because local bulletin board connections are frequently modified by their system operators, and they often have their own software quirks.
You have to explore your area to find which BBS systems have some kind of connectivity, and then call to see what's available.

The downside to connectivity such as this, in addition to not offering FTP and Telnet, is that such systems are usually available only through a limited number of telephone lines.
Prepare yourself for busy signals when you're trying to sign on to read your favorite newsgroups.
Many local BBS systems, too, carry only a fraction of the total available number of newsgroups, so you may have to lobby the system operator to add a group you're particularly interested in.

But don't overlook the tremendous upside of these systems.
Although they're still relatively rare, a growing number of BBSs with USENET hooks are becoming activated as interest in Internet-related activities grows.
For a great many people, a local BBS will be the first glimpse of the worldwide community of users that is the Internet.
These callers will have the chance to learn gradually, working through the USENET newsgroups and asking questions of local people and their own system operator as they go.
The system operators of these bulletin boards have a great deal to do with the recent explosion of interest in the Internet.

THE INTERNET VIA WILDCAT 

In recent months, more and more BBS packages running a variety of operating systems have appeared with some kind of Internet links, usually electronic mail alone.
The example in Figure 3.4 shows the sign-in procedure at New World Information Service BBS in Wichita, a system run by sysop Steve Meirowsky Meirowsky uses the Wildcat! BBS software from Mustang Software to manage his system.
In the figure, I am proceeding through the login at NWIS, entering my name and preparing to enter my password.

Figure 3.4

Signing on to a Wildcat! bulletin board

Systems like Meirowsky's tend to offer a variety of display options.

You can stick with straight VT100 emulation, or you can turn on ANSI graphics by choosing that option from your communications software.

Another possibility is RIP (Remote Imaging Protocol), a graphics display engine from TeleGrafix Communications, Inc.
RIPterm, the company's terminal package, allows you once equipped with the proper software on your own computer, to work with a more graphical interface which can use a mouse and point-and-click commands Whatever the choice of displays, you will find a menu offering basic service options like the one shown in Figure 3.5.

BBS packages now proliferate; space prohibits discussing them all.

You will see systems from Galacticomm (The Major BBS), which includes RIP support, and Searchlight BBS (from Searchlight Software), also including RIP Digital Dynamics produces a RIP-supporting BBS system called Synchronet BBS, while Dynamis Software's Tera BBS brings a complete mouse-driven environment to the UNIX operating system.
Other systems include WWIV (WWIV Software Services) and PC Board.
Whatever software your local BBS is running, you're likely to find that Internet access is becoming an option on more and more menus.
Keep your eye on this fast-changing Internet mail access option.

Figure 3.5

Local bulletin boards differ widely depending upon the software they use, but their menus are relatively intuitive

FINDING LOCAL BULLETIN BOARDS 

How can you find local bulletin boards with e-mail access and USENET newsgroups? It can be a tough proposition unless you keep your ear to the ground.
If a computer user group in your area is tracking bulletin board activity, they may provide a list of local boards.
In my area, an umbrella organization called the Triangle Computer Society maintains a monthly listing of all active boards; your area may also boast such a group.
Ask questions in the computer community, at retail stores, and on any bulletin boards you already frequent.
And don't forget your newsstand.
Boardwatch Magazine, CONNECT , and Online Access all track on-line developments and are expanding their coverage of the Internet.
New journals are certain to arise as well.

You could also tap into NixPub, a useful list of open-access UNIX sites worldwide.
Compiled by Phil Eschallier, NixPub is a superb resource, and represents the kind of thing the Internet does best-the open contribution of information to help others.
Of course, NixPub is also a prime example of the Internet Catch at work.
How do you get it? Through the Internet.
What's one way to access the Internet? By using the NixPub list.

So, while the following tells you where to find the list on-line, you will also find information from the most recent version (at the time of this printing) of the NixPub list in the appendix.
Later, we will examine the tools that can help you get it for yourself on-line.
When you do that, you can update your information as new lists appear.

COMMERCIAL ON-LINE SERVICES 

Here we need to be careful with terminology.
"Commercial on-line services" refers to operations like CompuServe, DELPHI, and America Online.
Before the Internet became a viable option, these and other services were the prime destination of the modem user who wanted to tap into extensive text databases, retrieve stock quotes, make computerized airline reservations, or join worldwide discussion groups.
And, as we have already seen, these services are not the same animal to which I refer as an Internet service provider.

The difference? Local service providers offer you a way to get onto the Internet by dialing into their own computers, which are, in turn, linked directly to the Internet.
When you called CompuServe or DELPHI, on the other hand, historically, you were connecting to an on-line service's mainframe computer, and using whatever features it made available for its members.
These commercial services, until recently, were a world unto themselves.
CompuServe members didn't run into BIX members, and GEnie participants usually didnït log on to DELPHI.

All that is changing rapidly, however, as the idea of Internet access takes hold.
Today, all the major commercial on-line services have set up gateways of one kind or another to the Internet.
Already, you can receive and send electronic mail between CompuServe, Prodigy, BIX, America Online, GEnie, and the Internet.
And while CompuServe and Prodigy both offer only electronic mv access, there is a growing movement among the commercial services to extend their reach.
Thus, DELPHI and BIX now provide full FTP and Telnet capabilities, along with access to a variety of Internet tools like Gopher and WAIS .
America Online is, at the time of this writing, planning similar connections.

And even if you have an electronic mail connection and nothing else, you can still do quite a lot with it, including requesting and receiving programs and other files (they're sent to you in the form of messages, which you must run through decoding routines to restore to their natural state), following mailing lists and their wide range of discussions, and retrieving a wealth of valuable background information about the Internet.
An e-mail link and a little ingenuity can produce startling results -you can even search directories and hunt down programs at remote sites by using the mail versions of Internet tools like archie and WAIS .

Chapter 8 focuses on using the Internet through e-mail alone.
Some of the workarounds are cumbersome, but the results may allow you to do everything you need to do.

THE FREE-NET ADVANTAGE 

A Free-Net is a superb idea; if there were more of them, Internet access wouldn't be as complicated as it sometimes is today.
A Free-Net, created by volunteers and maintained by people who believe in networking, is a computer system with two goals: to broaden a community's access base to local computing resources, and to provide hooks into the broader world of networking.
To do this, Free-Nets tap Internet connections, and that means they're a way for users to log on without the usual hassles.
Access is usually restricted to electronic mail and some Telnet capabilities.
On the plus side, Free-Nets generally provide easy-to-use menus.

The idea behind Free-Nets is to make telecommunications resources available to all; audience building is what this initiative is all about.
Think of National Public Radio (absent any federal funding); then apply the concept to computing.
Free-Nets are the brainchild of the National Public Telecommunication Network, or NPTN, which is based in Cleveland, OH.
By helping organizers in various parts of the United States, NPTN hopes to construct a network similar to what its media-based counterparts have created, only with the added resources of computing power to spread information.
A key word is "cybercasting," the dissemination of network services to NPTN "affiliates" around the country, supplementing local data with high-quality information feeds for all.

Free-Nets, though, aren't yet common.
Perhaps the best known is the Cleveland Free-Net, which was the testbed for the concept, and remains a driving force behind Free-Net development nationally.
The Cleveland Free-Net is accessible trough the Internet, as are its relatives such as Tri-State Online and the Heartland Free-Net.
Keep a lookout in your area for Free-Net development.
These systems can get you up and running on the Internet faster than any other.
Figure 3.6 shows what the Cleveland Free-Net looks like when you sign on from the Internet.
The screen will be slightly different when you call directly to the site.

The Free-Net concept involves community access and involvement, so it's no surprise to find a heavy emphasis on making the system workable for computer novices.
Look at the basic menus of the Cleveland Free-Net shown in Figure 3.7 and you'll see what I mean.

They're based on the concept of the town hall, with the various services broken out as menu options.
The metaphor is that of a town itself; you move through an on-line city, making choices as you go.

Figure 3.6

The introductory screen to the Cleveland Free-Net

Figure 3.7

An Upper Level menu on the Cleveland Free-Net

Choice 14, for example, The Communications Center , breaks into a submenu which offers access to electronic mail, other computer systems, and file transfer options.
You also have access to university library systems, databases on agriculture, space science, weather, oceanography, and geography, not to mention USENET news and a host of other features.
The menu system is simple to use, but as you begin to find your way around the Internet, mastering the commands on whatever system you use to access its resources, you may find yourself wishing for a leaner interface.
Nonetheless, it's hard to imagine an easier introduction to the Internet for the novice than a Free-Net.
The only problem: Unless you have a local Free-Net, tapping Free-Net resources isn't going to be workable unless you're already on the Internet.
So find out what's happening in your area about Free-Nets; here is a list of some currently active Free-Nets: xxx 

Nevertheless, people in the areas served by a Free-Net should take advantage at exploring it.
Watch for future Free-Net growth in many parts of the country.
Figure 3.8 shows cities where NPTN organizing committees have formed, so you can expect these sites to come on-line in the near future.

Keeping Up with Free-Nets 

Because new Free-Nets are coming on-line all the time, you will want to keep up with their activity.
Using the methods you will learn later in this book, can do so by using anonymous FTP to a site that contains Free-Net materials.

Figure 3.8

Free-Nets now organizing

DELPHI AND BIX: A COMMERCIAL SERVICE ALTERNATIVE

At the end of December 1992, General Videotex, a developer of on-line services based in Cambridge, MA, and parent company of the on-line services called DELPHI and BIX, announced that DELPHI had begun to provide full access to the Internet.
The term "full access" is now being used in a way we've come to understand-access to the big three Internet protocols of electronic mail, file transfers by FTP, and remote logins to other computers on the Internet using Telnet procedures.
The announcement marked the first time the Internet had been made accessible by a broad, consumer-based on-line service in such depth.
DELPHI's sister service BIX announced full Internet access soon afterward.

DELPHI and BIX opened up a new range of possibilities for Internet users.
These are not simply electronic mail gateways, but direct links into full Internet capabilities.
With local access numbers in some six hundred cities and towns throughout the United States and many foreign countries, these services have the potential for demystifying the Internet for the broad class of home and office users with modems.
DELPHI provides additional on-line support through an Internet forum, or Special Interest Group (SIG), specifically devoted to Internet use.
DELPHI's Internet SIG makes the transition between commercial on-line service and the Internet about as painless as it can get.

Another helpful factor is DELPHI's menu system.
Most commercial on-line services offer menu functions that guide the user through the maze of possible commands.
DELPHI is, in effect, providing training for new users by letting them work with familiar commands as they go about their journeys into the Internet.
In addition, users can access a range of DELPHI-specific features such as stock quotes, newswires, an on-line encyclopedia, a wide range of special interest groups, files for downloading, and multiplayer games.
It remains to be seen how many new users are lured into the Internet after first learning on-line methods with DELPHI's basic services, but the huge turnout so far-DELPHI estimates over ten thousand people have signed on for Internet services-suggests the experiment is working.
It will be interesting to see whether the new BIX offering matches these levels of growth.

Looking into DELPHI 

What can you expect when you try out DELPHI? The following examines the Internet Special Interest Group and what you can find there.

Figure 3.9 shows the menu you'll see if you go directly to the Internet SIG (which you can access by typing internet at the main system prompt).

Figure 3.9

The DELPHI Internet SIG menu

Here we find plenty of material here to keep the novice busy for some time.
The first stop for the new user should be the About the Internet section accessible by entering about at the prompt.
This generates the menu shown in Figure 3.10.

You can also examine the Databases (Files) area, where you'll find a number of background resources, including many we'll later pick up as part of our Internet library-building project.
To move to this area, simply enter data at the prompt.
DELPHI's menu system is such that entering only part of a word will take you where you want to go, as long as the system can distinguish your command from other commands beginning with the same letters.
Figure 3.11 shows some of the on-line resources on DELPHI.

Obviously, DELPHI can be a valuable source of background materials, but how do we actually get into the Internet? Again, the easy-to-use menu structure comes to the rescue.
You'll have noticed in Figure 3.9 in the Internet SIG main menu, that there are FTP and Telnet options.
If you were to use either option by way of a conventional dial-up information provider, you'd most likely have to find your way step by step.
(There are exceptions-Performance Systems International distributes a software package called PSILink which shields you from some Internet complexities, as do Portal and Pipeline, among others.) 

Figure 3.9

The DELPHI menu for About the Internet

Figure 3.12 shows DELPHI's Telnet option, accessed by entering telnet at the SIG prompt.
This is the basic Telnet service.
If you simply enter an Internet address at the Telnet prompt, you will be taken into a Telnet session at that address.
Much the same would happen if you chose FTP at the main SIG prompt; again, you would be asked for an address.
From this point on, you're on the Internet, and what you see on-screen will depend upon the system you accessed.
There is a wide variety of possibilities; they're what this book is about.

Figure 3.11

Some of the resources available on DELPHI

Files by the Gigabyte 

The best way to learn the Internet is through hands-on experience, which is why we'll begin our discussion of FTP, or File Transfer Protocol, right away.
FTP is a way of sending files between computers.
One great benefit of the TCP/IP protocols is their ability to give computers using different operating systems a common set of tools, the implements out of which the worldwide internetworking process called the Internet has evolved.
That means it doesn't matter if you are using an Apple Macintosh logged on to a Sun Microsystems workstation using UNIX at your service provider's site, and want to tap into a remote IBM mainframe computer using VM.

Using the FTP protocol, you can get the file you need with a few simple commands.

For the purposes of this book, FTP is a major tool.
As you go through topics from USENET to Gopher , from database access to BITNET mailing lists, you will learn how to use the Internet itself to generate further information on each of these topics.
In many cases, you will be directed to information available as text files on remote computers, which you'll access through the FTP protocol.
Intimidating at first, this process quickly becomes second-nature, and you'll soon be zipping around the world with ease.
The variety of software and text available is staggering.

But don't be put off by FTP.
If you only have electronic mail access to the Internet because you're logging on through one of the commercial dial-up services, you can still retrieve files.
Although you won't have the interactive capability offered by FTP to log on to a remote computer and prowl around in its directories, you will be able to locate the file you need and have it sent to you by electronic mail.
The process is complex and can be slow, but it works.
You will learn how in Chapter 8.

We're talking gigabytes of information here.
A gigabyte is approximately equal to one billion bytes, meaning one gigabyte equals some 1,000 megabytes.
The archie program, which we'll look at shortly, tracks over one thousand sites which you as a public access user can tap.
Some estimates of files available over the Internet run as high as 6 terabytes, or 6,000 gigabytes.
Granted, there is a great deal of overlap when a successful program appears on the directory listings of multiple sites.
But it's clear that ongoing software development and the posting of unique text resources will keep the FTP sites of the world a fascinating and ever-changing place to explore.

SHAREWARE AND PUBLIC DOMAIN SOFTWARE 

You won't find commercial software at FTP archive sites because licensing agreements prohibit it from being posted publicly.
But you will find shareware and software that's in the public domain.
The two differ: Public domain software is free, while shareware requires you to pay the author if, after a trial period, you decide to keep and use the program.
You'll also find so-called "freeware," software on which the author retains copyright, but which he or she allows you to use for free.
The shareware movement has produced some remarkably successful programs; among them are Procomm, a telecommunications program; PC-File, a database which was one of the earliest shareware programs to be marketed; and PC-Write, a full-featured word processor.

The traditional method of dissemination for these programs has been the computer bulletin board.
Consumer-driven on-line services such as GEnie and CompuServe have long recognized the importance of software to their user bases.
Each provides extensive program libraries, often broken out by specific area of interest, so users can download programs they need.
And the mushrooming growth of private bulletin board systems (BBSs) throughout the world has provided thousands of new repositories for shareware and public domain programs.
Exec-PC is a case in point.

The Wisconsin-based BBS maintains over 450,000 files in its libraries, available to the dial-up caller.

The Internet adds an interesting twist to the shareware story.
In the UNIX world, there exists a long tradition of free software development, as exemplified by the continuing work on a project called the Free Software Foundation.
FSF's head, Richard Stallman, is of the opinion that software should be shared by the user community.
Huge amounts of free software have been produced by programmers associated with Stallman, and the Foundation has been instrumental in developing GNU (Gnu's Not UNIX), an operating system designed as a free work-alike for UNIX.
GNU EMACS and GNU C are well-distributed software tools written as part of the overall GNU project.

You probably will not use GNU or its associated utilities, not unless you get involved with networked workstations, but you should understand that the vigorous free software movement on the Internet is in many respects more vocal than the comparable scene on the PC/Macintosh side of the world.
Whereas shareware, the idea of paying for software after a trial use, has become common among commercial service users, there is still a powerful user community insisting on software's free distribution on the Internet.

And unlike the commercial services, the Internet is a vast and landscape.
There are few menus to guide the traveler, and even at the largest archival sites, software can be challenging to locate by type or description.
Also, unlike America Online or DELPHI, the Internet's libraries contain a much higher proportion of professional materials.
You'll certainly find Procomm, PC-Write, and the rest of the PC shareware panoply here, but you'll also encounter the client software that drives networked computers of various descriptions and allows them to tap into Internet resources.
You'll find archival sites for magazines and newsletters, scientific documents, and maps.
You'll find the textual treasures of Project Gutenberg and the Online Book Initiative, electronic editions of classic works of literature.

The Internet is a vast realm, most of it yet uncharted, but the tools for exploring it are growing in sophistication, as you'll see when we consider the archie program later in this chapter, and the retrieval capabilities of WAIS , Gopher , and the rest later on.
With software available at numerous sites, you'll learn to move around the globe to collect what you need.
The process will be fundamentally different from what dial-up users are accustomed to.
You will not tap BBS systems but networked computers, using the FTP capabilities provided by TCP/IP.
Instead of keeping a list of telephone numbers and dialing up BBS systems in sequence, you'll call one number-your access provider's-and move out from there by FTP, using your provider's network presence and related software to reach your destinations.

DESCRIPTION OF ARCHIVE SITES 

As compared to a BBS, run by one or more operators, or a commercial on-line service, run by a company whose business is providing connectivity for the public, Internet FTP sites usually have other things to do.
They're working computer systems at a variety of locations worldwide.
While their resources, or at least some of them, have been made available for FTP purposes, meaning anyone can go into their archives and download files, they are not designed for the general public, nor are they necessarily "user friendly."
You won't find, for example, an FTP site with an easy-to-use interface like CompuServe Information Manager, or a logical menu structure like DELPHI's.

That means a bit more work, but the sheer immensity of the resources available is compelling enough to encourage us up the learning curve.
But first, a matter of terminology.
Throughout this book you will use anonymous FTP as you log on to remote sites and pull down information.
Anonymous FTP is the ability to log on and retrieve publicly accessible files without any special permission to do so.
You'll enter anonymous when asked for a name, clueing in the remote computer that you are logging on to a part of the disk reserved for public use.

You can see why this would be necessary.
Because so many of these systems are providing services to organizations ranging from research laboratories to medical clinics, from military bases to universities, it would present enormous security challenges simply to leave the computer open to FTP without any kind of restriction.
A hard disk or an entire computer can be devoted to public information, but the anonymous FTP protocol ensures that you have available the part of their resources the people at the host computer site are willing to share.

Some of these sites are treasure troves.
Washington University in St.
Louis, for example, offers a huge repository of software and information.
Here you find not just public domain and shareware programs, but a wealth of other data including USENET newsgroups (similar to CompuServe Forums and GEnie RoundTables, as you'll see in Chapter 11).
There are many Macintosh programs the complete source code to TeX, a powerful text formatter, as well as the X-windowing system, which is widely used on UNIX computers.
There's a clone of UNIX for IBM-compatible PCs, and a collection of Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) pictures.
No matter what your own computer, there's something for you here.

Washington University wuarchive.westl.edu isn't much like a dial-up commercial service; neither is the site at ftp.uu.net where UUNET Technologies of Falls Church, VA maintains thousands of files, nor the oak.oakland.edu archive covering a multitude of software programs for various operating systems.
Macintosh users aren't left out of the picture, either; plentiful material resides at such addresses as ftp.apple.com , mac.archive.umich.edu , and sumex-aim.standford.edu .
Amiga and Atari users can find much to occs their attention at mars.ee.msstate.edu .

Perhaps the most obvious difference between such Internet archival sites and the libraries of the commercial vendors will be in the nature of their software.
Whereas a commercial service will focus on the most popularly available personal computers-those using MS-DOS and Macintosh software-because these represent the dominant equipment base of its user population, an Internet archival site is likely to include a much broader range of materials.
You know about UNIX software at Washington University, but you'll also find tools for VAX users (VMS is their operating system), IBM minicomputers and mainframe computers, and more.
Look for Sun Microsystems material, for example, a titan.cs.rice.edu , while OS/2 is supported at ftp-os2.cdrom.com .
You can expect to see a lot of things that won't interest a dial-up user along with a wealth of programs and text materials that certainly will.

There's still another difference between the commercial on-line services' libraries and the FTP sites of the Internet.
CompuServe's forums, for example, are run by system operators (sysops) who are paid by CompuServe.
The job of the sysop is to keep a close check on the files uploaded to the libraries, to make sure they contain no viruses, to ensure that they work, and to determine that they're worthwile.
A good sysop also makes sure the programs are current versions.
Software at FTP sites, on the other hand, may or may not receive this kind of careful scrutiny.
There are so many FTP sites out there, with holdings so diverse, that there is no way to be sure how carefully a particular site has checked a given program.

Assume you've heard about a great new communications program.
On CompuServe, you'd log on to a particular forum, perhaps the IBM Communications Forum.
There you'd leave a message asking about the program.
Because CompuServe offers a central repository for files and messages, others could respond and tell you in which library to look for your program.
You could be assured you had the latest version in most cases merely by downloading the most recently dated copy of the program.
Updates and new version announcements would generally be made in the same forum, so you could keep up with program developments without difficulty.

The Internet is more challenging.
Finding the program requires you to scar a wide range of FTP sites for what you want, using tools like archie , which is discussed later in this chapter.
Unfortunately, archie does not rank its findings by version number or date.
Once you've found the program, usually at any number of sites, you must look carefully to determine which version you're getting, and in some cases, it may be impossible to tell without actually downloading the program.
Keeping up with updates is likewise decentralized.
The best avenue is to subscribe to an appropriate newsgroup on USENET, watching out for news of your program.
Ultimately, you will have the same software up and running, but it often takes more ingenuity to achieve the same end on the Internet than on the commercial service.

Internet users, then, must learn to take advantage of the self-referential nature of this metanetwork.
A good networker will constantly update information and learn new tricks by following USENET newsgroups, reading mail, and using FTP to pull in publicly available materials.
A premise of this book is that the Internet is a moving target, whose constantly shifting parameters impel us to compile our own up-to-date libraries of information.
Books are not yet obsolete, nor will they ever be.
But supplementing books, constantly revising data, building electronic Alexandrias immune from damage caused by the loss of a single site, is what the Internet does best.

COURTESY WHEN USING FTP 

It's time to try out FTP.
But first, a word about network courtesy.

If we barge into the computers at UUNET or Washington University, or any other working site for that matter, without regard to the effect we're having on local operations, we're committing a newcomer's blunder.
The Internet's wide reaches are filled with people trying to get things done.
While it's exciting to have software archives accessible at so many different sites, it should also give us pause.

With network usage comes network responsibility, and overuse of a privilege can cause the entire user community to suffer.

Basic courtesy, then, involves minimizing the amount of resource drain we put on the Internet.
FTP sessions should be run only after working hours .
And if you fail to take into account the Internet's wide reach, you'll be making a mistake.
Sure, it's simple to tie into a computer in Finland, but if it's early morning where you are on the California coast, it's late afternoon in Finland and people are trying to get work done.
Base your calling on the local time at the site you're planning to reach .
Plan on calling between 1900 and 0600 hours at the site .

A SAMPLE FTP SESSION 

With that in mind, let's now retrieve some information.
The format outlined here is the one used in the rest of the book for FTP procedures.
Refer back to this section if you have trouble later on, as the basic file transfer and downloading instructions are contained here.
And if you're using DELPHI, be sure to read the special FTP procedures necessary with that system.
We will discuss them later in this chapter.

I've chosen a file containing an index of materials available on one prominent network site, the SURAnet Network Information Center in College Park, MD.
It's a useful list because it illustrates the resources available at a single network location.
A network information center, or NIC, is itself a valuable resource, offering a variety of information about the services available on-line.
As we explore the Internet, we'll find many NICs that offer useful material which they make available by anonymous FTP.

We'll get an ASCII file; ASCII stands for the American Standard Code for Information Interchange.
To say that a file is in ASCII format has important implications.
It means that nothing in the file deviates from this standard; the file is therefore readable by virtually any computer.
Contrast this with, say, a WordPerfect file that contains all the formatting codes and other information specific to that word processor.
You could download it, but you wouldn't be able to do anything with it unless you had a copy of WordPerfect and could load it into the word processor.
ASCII can be viewed by just about anybody.

If English is the standard language of commerce worldwide, ASCII is the standard language of computing.

Remember, you want to handle this file transaction after business hours at the site, so check the clock.
The following is the FTP procedure in a nutshell.
At your service provider's command prompt, enter the FTP command, followed by the destination.
Figure 5.1 shows what you'll see on-screen.
Commands I've entered are shown in bold type.
Notice that the tertn "ftp" is part of the address.
Thus, our actual command is ftp ftp.sura.net .

Figure 5.1

Logging on at the SURAnet NIC

As you can see, we've logged on by sending the word anonymous when prompted for a name, and sending our complete user name as the password.
The password doesn't show up in this transaction because it's blanked as you type, but note that we're prompted to enter it by the phrase Guest login ok, send e-mail address as password .
I then entered gilster@interpath.net as my password.
We then see a sign-on message followed by the FTP prompt.
At the prompt, I asked for a directory listing by entering the command dir .
Figure 5.2 shows the listing.

Many of the things we tend to look for at FTP sites will be found in directories called pub ; in this case, we need to move to a subdirectory attached to pub called nic ; in other words, our target is pub/nic .
Let's check there for the file in question.
We'll switch to that directory by entering cd pub/nic and again run a dir command, as shown on the next page in Figure 5.3.

The file we want is OO-README.FIRST .
Note the capital letters-remember, UNIX is case-sensitive! To retrieve this file, we'll use the get command.
The transfer will take place with the following screen information presented: xxx .

As you can see, after the file was retrieved I entered the bye command to log off.

Note how quick the transfer was.
The first thing that strikes dial-up users about FTP is that they've never seen bytes fly through a connection as quickly as they move through the Internet's high-speed hookups.
There's a big difference between a standard twisted-pair telephone connection like the one running into your home and a high-speed T-3 line linking supercomputer sites on the NSFNET backbone network, which moves data at 45 Mbps (45 megabits per second).
According to Merit Network Inc., a statewide network in Michigan, which helped implement the upgrade from T-1 to T-3, 45 Mbps is like moving all the information in a 20-volume encyclopedia in less than 23 seconds.

Figure 5.2

A directory listing at the SURAnet NIC

Figure 5.3

The public directory at SURAnet

Your modem connected to an on-line service can't move quite that fast; it's probably a 2400-bps (bits per second) modem, or perhaps a 9600-bps model.
At 2400 bps, you're moving data at roughly 240 characters every second; a 9600-bps modem should produce up to 960 characters per second, although actual rates depend upon such external factors as line noise.
A so-called "dial-up" modem is designed to be effective over voice-grade telephone lines, and must cope their limitations.

Internet file transfers take advantage of a ride on broadband fiber- optic cables using sophisticated routers to move local network traffic onto the backbone; no wonder they're fast.
To get used to the Internet, you remember the varying nature of the communications links it encompasses.
Dial-up modems connect some computers to the network, but so do dedicated leased lines, moving traffic at much higher speeds.
Some Internet traffic by satellite links, some by microwave, and much of it by way of fiber optics.
The genius of TCP/IP, of course, is that it can work with such diverse communications capabilities and interconnect them all.

Digression: A Bit More UNIX 

Remember that the blink of an eye it took to bring your file from SURAnet to your service provider's computer does not mean that it is now on your computer.
However, because the file is available through your provider, you can examine it with a series of standard UNIX commands.
To make sure it's there, enter Is at your command prompt, and you should see the file name, along with whatever else is currently in your home directory.
I see the following when I type the ls command at my account at Interpath: xxx .

Examine this listing for a moment.
There's our file, 00-README.FIRST .
Along with it is the name of another file, called xmodem.log , which is a record of the uploads and downloads I've done by way of the Xmodem file transfer protocol to this computer.

Note, though, that some of the entries are followed by a slash (/).

This indicates they are not files but subdirectories.
We can change, for example, to the News subdirectory by entering cd News .
Here, too, we must remember that UNIX is case-sensitive; entering cd news (small "n") will simply cause the system to tell you no such directory exists.
We can enter cd to return to the home directory.
This wouldn't work in DOS, where entering cd with no further commands produces only another display of the command prompt.
In UNIX, the cd command changes the working directory to your home directory.

Note that UNIX uses a slash (/) in path names for directories; thus /home/gilster is a statement of the subdirectory gilster's location branching off from the directory home which, in turn, branches off from the root directory, known solely by its slash as /.
You can change between directories with the cd command.
If you get lost doing so, a pwd command displays the absolute path name for the current working directory.
Remember, too, that entering ls-l will give you an expanded listing of the directory xxx .

With that bit of UNIX directory lore as reminder, let's take a look at the name of our retrieved file.
00-README.FIRST is glaringly different from the name of a standard DOS file.

With DOS, you're limited to an eight-character (or less) file name along with a three-character extension, in the form MYFILE.DOS (this is why DOS users have become so adept at expressive three-letter extension names-they have no choice).
FILE.TXT, FILE.DOC, FILE.NTS , and so on, are all legitimate DOS file names.
So, for that matter, is the DOS equivalent of the file we just downloaded, which could have been something like 00readme.1st .

UNIX clearly has different conventions.
It does not limit you to eight-character names, for one thing.
And, unlike DOS, a file name can contain more than a single period (.).
Thus you could have a file called test.ltr.fax in UNIX, but a DOS file named tst.ltr.fx is impermissible.
DOS uses the period for one purpose only: to separate the base name from the extension.

Is 00-README.FIRST a useful document?
Let's read it by using the UNIX more command, which you can invoke at your service provider's prompt, as shown in Figure 5.4.

Here we have the first page of the document, broken at the bottom of the screen.
As you saw in Chapter 4, the more command allows you to page through the file one screen at a time, pressing the SPACEBAR at the end of each screen to advance to the next page.
Accustomed to pressing the RETURN key to move between pages on commercial on-line systems, dial-up users are frustrated when they try this with UNIX, since the more program will simply advance the text one line at a time with a RETURN key command.
It will take you a long time to read any file that way! (A q command, incidentally, takes you out of more back to the system command prompt at any point during your reading; you don't have to page through the entire file).

THE NIC GOLDMINE 

Note in Figure 5.4 that the more program indicates we have a good bit of the file to go.
You might want to page through this file to get an idea of the resources available to you here.
The index includes a read-out by means of ls -IR (a command that generates not only a fuller directory listing of the current directory, but a list of the contents of all subdirectories as well) of what's in the NIC computers at SURAnet.
Figure 5.5 gives you an idea.

There are numerous files in the working directory, which is what you'll find yourself in when you log on by FTP.
But notice too that there are subdirectories marked with their distinctive stamp drwxr-sr-x .
The files, in contrast, are marked -rw-r-r- .
A regular file when listed this way always shows up with a dash (-) in front of its listing; a d always signifies a directory.
The first character in each line of the listing, then, identifies whether it's a file or a directory.
The remaining characters contain security information, or permissions , explaining who can access the file.
We will not discuss UNIX file permissions in this book.
For more on UNIX permissions, and on UNIX in general, see A Student's Guide to UNIX by Harley Hahn (McGraw Hill, 1993).

You may also want to consult UNIX Power Tools , by Jerry Peak, Tim O'Reilly, and Mike Loukides (O'Reilly/ Bantam, 1993) for a superb collection of UNIX tips and techniques.
And an excellent short take on UNIX is Learning the UNIX Operating System , by Grace Todino, John Strang, and Jerry Peak (O'Reilly & Assoc., 1993).

Figure 5.4

The 00-README.FIRST file, read on-line with the more command

Figure 5.5

A glimpse of the internet background information available at a Network Information Center 

NICs, as you can see from the file descriptions in Figure 5.5, go out of their way to provide useful information to their users.
A number of how-to guides are presented here, along with useful overall documents like the one called Internet-Tour.txt .

The following is its file listing: xxx .

The file size is shown to the left of the date of this file's last modification; it's 216,594 bytes, so we're dealing with a big file.

Next to this is the title itself.

A number of interesting files are to be found at SURAnet, some of which well call upon later as we build up a network library.
One called networking.terms looks helpful; it contains basic terminology for people new to the Internet.
Another is netiquette.txt ; it's the Miss Manners document of the network, especially useful for people who have logged on but who don't yet know what is and is not acceptable.
And note the subdirectories here; one is filled with information on the NREN, the proposed National Research and Education Network that will eventually become the U.S. part of the Internet for the American research and education community.
There's a subdirectory called Network Service Guides , and another called ZEN , which contains a popular network document known as Zen and the Art of the Internet .
It provides much useful background material.

USING DELPHI TO RUN AN FTP SESSION 

DELPHI is based on computers using the VMS operating system, which runs on Digital Equipment Corporation equipment.
This can pose problems FTP sessions, and if you are using DELPHI or any other VAS system to manage your file transfer work, you should consider several alternative actions if the transfer does not work out as planned.
There are two areas of concern: 

Changing directories may require you to add quotation marks to be effective.
If you try the command cd pub/nic , for example, and it fails to work, try cd "pub/nic" .

Retrieving a file may also fail when you're using FTP from a VMS system.
If this occurs, try enclosing the file name in quotes.
Thus, if get 00-README.FIRST fails, try get "00-README.FIRST" .

GETTING FILES TO YOUR COMPUTER

Before we move on to look at another Network Information Center, let's do something about that index file, 00- README.FIRST .
We want to get it onto our own computer because a print-out would be a helpful document to keep.
First we will change its UNIX-style file name into something shorter, so we don't have to wrestle with so many characters.
The command is simple: xxx .

You can run another directory display by using ls to be sure the command took.
The mv command is called move because it does just that: It moves the data in one file to another, and then deletes the original file.

Downloading the File with Xmodem 

Now we can download the file to our computer.
Here the terms begin to a bit more familiar.
We can use the file transfer protocol Xmodem to download the file.
Modem, created by telecommunications guru Ward Christensen, is one of a number of error-checking protocols familiar to users of commercial on-line systems; others include Ymodem, Kermit, and Zmodem.
I'll rely on Xmodem for our task here because it's so widely distributed throughout the on-line world, and most users of commercial services are familiar with it.
You'll also find it installed on virtually any service provider's computers.
And it's hard to name a communications software package that doesn't include Modem.

Xmodem operates by transferring files in 128-byte blocks, adding an extra bit called the checksum to each block.
The extra bit is useful; it allows the receiving computer to determine whether the transmission was accurate (if not, the protocol causes the receiving machine to request a retransmittal of the data packet).
In this way, despite the perils of line noise or other communications difficulties, even large, complex files can be transmitted safely to their destination.

Using Modem by way of a dial-up UNIX account requires calling up the Modem program from the command prompt and specifying the parameters and file name.
Typically, the program will support Modem and Modem/CRC (CRC stands for cyclic redundancy check, which increases error-checking efficiency), as well as Ymodem and Ymodem-G.
More on each of these as we go through the Modem command options.

We can perform a simple file transfer like the one in question by entering the command shown in the following: xxx .

As you see, the result is a message from the computer telling us the estimated file size, number of sectors and bytes in the file, and an estimated transmission time.
At this point, the service provider's computer is waiting for you to begin receiving the file.
You specify the appropriate protocol (Modem) in your communications software, enter a file name for the incoming file, and start the download procedure as prompted.

The way Modem is implemented on your system may vary.
If you try the xmodem command and nothing happens, try the sx command.
In other words, to move the read.me file above, we would send the command sx -a read.me .
In this case, the -a is used because we are retrieving an ASCII file.
We would use -b if our file were binary in nature, like a picture or a program file.

Downloading with Zmodem 

We can also use Zmodem to achieve the same result; in fact, Zmodem is preferable, because it is widely used and faster than Modem.
To transfer the read.me file with Zmodem, we simply change one letter.
Our command becomes sz -a read.me .
And again, if we were going to receive a binary file, we would change the suffix to a b , thus, sz -b filename.

Uploading Files

There doubtless will be occasions when you want to upload a file to your service provider's computer.
You may, for example, want to compose a lengthy message to someone without trying to use the on-line UNIX text editors to do so.
In this case, the command is simple.
We would use rz -a to upload an ASCII file, and rz -b to upload a binary file.
Thus, to upload letter.doc to my service provider's machine, my command is rz -a letter.doc .

If I were using Modem to do the same thing, I could simply make a one-letter substitution.
Thus, rx -a would send an ASCII file: rx -b would send a binary file.
Remember that, whichever protocol you choose for file transfer,you must have set your communications software to use that protocol.
Being set for Zmodem in your communications program and telling your service provider to receive in Modem simply won't work.

TRANSLATING ASCII FOR YOUR COMPUTER 

You've just downloaded a text, or ASCII, file using a binary download protocol.
There are other ways you could have retrieved the file, including the simplest: using the UNIX cat command to cause the file to scroll without page breaks and capturing the results by turning on your communications program's capture buffer.

But using Modem makes a great deal of sense, even when you're dealing with ASCII.
The reason: The download is more accurate, because Modem checks for errors and corrects them when it finds them.
Make it a habit to use error-checking protocols no matter what kind of file you want to retrieve.

But there's more to this story.
I said earlier that ASCII is a file standard.
This may have been overly optimistic.
In fact, not all ASCII characters are standardized.
In particular, computer systems don't always have the same ideas about how to end a line of text.
An MS-DOS computer ends lines with a carriage return (CR) and line feed (LF).
These characters, CR and LF, are ASCII codes 13 and 10.

Macintoshes use only the carriage return to end a line.
UNIX systems use only the line feed.

Can you see the problem?
A Macintosh doesn't know what to do with the line feed character at the end of every line of a PC file.

Open a PC text file on a Macintosh and it displays these characters; it cannot interpret them.
On a UNIX system, the text file you upload from your MS-DOS computer has an extra carriage return for every line.
Retrieve a file from a UNIX system, on the other hand, and the MS-DOS user has to create the standard carriage return/line feed pairs MS-DOS expects, while the Macintosh user needs the carriage return characters the Mac likes.

Problems like these can be handled by invoking command line parameters.
You've already used parameters; the command sz - b involves them, st-b stands for send by way of Zmodem in binary format.
By varying the paramaters after the sz command, you can handle a wide range of possibilities, including uploading as well as downloading to the service provider's computer.

Several of these parameters can be useful, depending on the type of computer you're using.
What follows are the parameters for Xmodem to illustrate the options available.

MODEM PARAMETERS 

The basic modem command structure is: xxx .

rb Receive Binary.
Here you're sending, rather than receiving files.
rb means that files are to be placed on the service provider's computer without any conversion.

Xmodem destroys existing files of the same name so be careful.
You might upload if you're planning to send a previously prepared file to someone as a message.

rt Receive Text.
This process converts an incoming file in MS-DOS format to a form more familiar to UNIX.
The CR-LF pairs are converted to the UNIX line-feed-only format.
The result is a file that UNIX editors can use.

ra Receive Apple.
This does the same thing as rt but for files sent from Apple Macintosh computers.

It translates the CR characters in the incoming file into UNIX line feeds.

sb Send Binary.
Here, files are sent from your service provider's computer to you without conversion, just as they exist on the UNIX disk.

st Send Text.
This translates the UNIX line feed characters into the CR/LF pairs MS-DOS wants in a text file.

sa Send Apple.
Does the same thing as the st parameter, but converts UNIX line feed characters into CR characters.

OTHER MODEM OPTIONS 

The following options should give you every tool you need to get a file from your service provider's computer to your own.
I generally work with Ymodem because I transfer more than one file at a time on most occasions; when I download a series of files, I'll specify xmodem sbyk filename1 filename2 , etc.
I then sit back and let my communications software, Crosstalk for Windows, handle the transfer.

y Although still invoked through the xmodem command, the y option ( xmodem y ) selects the Ymodem batch protocol for sending files.
Ymodem uses CRC error checking and can transfer multiple files.
Because it transmits data in 1K blocks (Modem uses 128-byte blocks), Ymodem can be significantly faster than Xmodem, although it doesn't function nearly as well when you're working with a poor telephone connection.

g Selects Ymodem-G, a variant of Ymodem which sends files in a continuous stream.
Ymodem-G works only with error-free connections because it contains no built-in error correction.
But if you have an error-correcting modem, it can transfer files quickly.

m Uses the Modem7 batch protocol for sending files.
This means a list of files specified on the command line will be sent in sequence.
This batch protocol is used automatically if the sending program requests it.
Use Modem7 only if Ymodem batch protocols aren't available in your communications program.

k Uses the Modem-lK mode for sending files.
By using 1K packets, speed can be increased, but as with Ymodem, excessive transmission retries due to line noise or other errors can significantly slow operations.

c Uses CRC error checking when receiving files.
CRC is automatically selected for transmission if the receiving modem program requests it.

l Do not write to the log file.
A file called xmodem.log in your directory area is normally appended to whenever you use Modem to handle a file upload or download 

A World of Electronic Mail 

Electronic mail is a core Internet application.
Using e-mail, you can communicate with people all over the world, often receiving replies the same day.
Your messages are stored in the recipient's mailbox until they are read, so there's little risk of their being overlooked.
You can include previous messages in what you write; you can send your mail to one person or a group of users.
And because mail management involves no more than mastering a few basic commands, you can gain control over the influx quickly as your daily mail count grows, saving what you need, discarding the rest.

Electronic mail is fast, powerful, and addictive; once you've worked with it, you'll wonder how you got along without it.

What appears in my own mailbox changes frequently, as I move into and out of various mailing lists and develop on-line relationships with more and more people.
Whether near or far, my correspondents and I have one thing in common: We've learned that an electronic mailbox is a tool that can be customized to meet a wide variety of interests and needs.
To make it all work, you have to know the options available to you.
Proper navigation techniques are just as important with electronic mail as with any other part of the Internet.

In this chapter, we'll discuss what electronic mail can do for you and how you can use a mail program to continue your on-line explorations.
Because Internet addresses are the first thing users see, we'll take the mystery out of these cryptic runes, and then move on to a sample log-in session, working through the primary commands in a UNIX program called pine .
We'll also examine a mail program called elm , and present the most basic mail tool of all, the no-frills mail program.
No matter which mail program you choose to use, I guarantee your Internet mailbox will soon become one of your most valuable assets.

SHATTERING THE BORDERS 

Many people use mail as their only Internet application, not realizing how much else is available, or finding that the power of e-mail meets their current needs.
Get involved with a number of on-line correspondents and your electronic mailbox can quickly grow to gigantic proportions, particularly when you subscribe to the mailing lists and other sources that are described later.

Fortunately, the Internet could not grow to its present complexity without providing tools that make mail management feasible.
Many such tools -the lug wrenches and precision screwdrivers of electronic-file maintenance-are in varying degrees of power and user-friendliness.
But using electronic mail doesn't have to be complicated.
A practical knowledge of a few simple programs is all it takes to participate.
And the scope of e-mail is wide.

Mail can reach out beyond the Internet itself.
You might think of the Internet as the core medium you can use to contact a wide variety of other networks (which use different protocols than the Internet's TCP/IP to provide their own kinds of information and connectivity).
If you use local bulletin board systems to exchange messages and download files, you're probably familiar with FidoNet, which allows your local system to be connected with thousands of other computers by telephone link.
FidoNet is often a user's first stop on the road to the Internet.
By making a local telephone call, users can read and respond to messages that may have been written a city or a continent away.

Then there's BITNET, an academic and research network with powerful mail distribution features explored more fully in another chapter.

There's UUCP which stands for UNIX-to-UNIX Copy Program; its store and forward capabilities keep USENET humming, running newsgroups on countless subjects.
There are the big commercial providers, such as CompuServe, GEnie, and DELPHI, not to mention dedicated e-mail specialists like MCI Mail.
Users of all these services are available for electronic mail correspondence through your Internet connection, and the Internet's ever-widening series of gateways ensures that connectivity with other providers will only grow.

So the first caveat is this: If you use any other information provider -even if you're an old hand-you must change your thinking as you approach the Internet.
You're used to sending a message to a limited audience-people who have accounts with a particular provider.
But Internet communications ignore such borders.
Get used to a communications medium where the transfer of information occurs not just between fellow members of one networked group, but between networks worldwide, no matter what their protocols.
And remember, users of those other networks can just as readily get back to you.

A WORD TO USERS OF COMMERCIAL ON-LINE SERVICES

If you are sending electronic mail to the Internet from a commercial service like CompuServe or America Online, you will not be able to use the UNIX mail program.
Nor will you be able to work with pine or elm , or any of the other mail programs available through a UNIX-based service provider.
The commands in this chapter will therefore be irrelevant.
You will need to work through the mail system provided by your service-instead of worrying about the various UNIX programs, you need to know how to handle CompuServe Mail, or DELPHI Mail, or whatever service you use.
Because of the number of such on-line offerings, space does not make it possible to go into them all here.

The best advice is to spend time brushing up on your system's commands, an effort that will pay off soon, as we will see in the next chapter.

ELECTRONIC MAIL DEFINED 

Electronic mail provides the ability to send messages by computer.
A letter routed electronically has enormous advantages over conventional mail, not the least of which is the speed of its delivery.
Internet regulars say it all when they refer to the U.S. Postal Service as "snail mail."
Indeed, after only a few days of mastering electronic mail, it seems hard to imagine the days when the mailbox at the end of the driveway was the only way we could communicate with people who were far away.
Dazzled by the possibilities of the new medium, we want the rest of the world to operate as smoothly, as usefully, as our electronic mailbox.

Unlike a letter printed on paper, an electronic mail message can be stored on your computer disk.
You can handle it like any other file, pulling it into your word processor for editing or printing, or perhaps forwarding it to another person you think would be interested.
People who are novices at electronic mail are often surprised at the high rate of return they receive on their Internet mail.
The reason is obvious: People find it easier to use a brief computer command to package and send a message than to look up a person's address, print out the letter, address an envelope, and send the whole thing off with a stamp.

The concept of electronic mail is taking time to penetrate the general population.
Surprisingly, although office-based computer networks are becoming the norm, only some twenty percent take advantage of e-mail to send messages between workers.
And while users of commercial on-line services may have some experience with the medium, most have not glimpsed the full power of e-mail, nor have they guessed that e-mail is headed toward an even brighter future, connecting not just the users of one computer system, but crossing electronic frontiers to reach users across the way.
All that is coming, and much of it is here right now.

Every morning when I dial in to the Internet, a mailbox stuffed with messages is waiting for me.
Discussing the ins and outs of the writing trade with a fellow practitioner is something I now do at the keyboard.
Because my phone is often busy, there's no reason to leave messages on my voice mail system; my correspondents know I'll see any message they leave by e-mail quickly.
Is there a hot new restaurant in town?
Someone is sure to tell me.
Has a nearby company produced an unbeatable software product?
My e-mail will soon have news of it.
Is a new site available for file downloads?
One way or another, e-mail will tell the tale.

But the great thing about this electronic version of the post office is that it's immune to distance.
The message left for me this morning at a terminal in Edinburgh, Scotland is already in my mailbox in Raleigh by the time I log on.
My response is automatic: By replying to the missive with a simple command, all necessary routing information is added to my message, and it takes but a keystroke to send it flying by high-speed network to its destination.
The message I received last week from New Zealand keeping me up on news in Wellington could as easily have come from Duke University, a mere twenty miles down the road, so transparent is the Internet's mail function.

And there's more, considerably more.
Maybe I need to get word to a group of friends that a new market for telecommunications writers is about to open up.
Rather than writing a series of letters to various correspondents, I can write one e-mail message and direct it to multiple sites.
The recipients can read my message at their leisure and then respond to it.
We've set up a circle of interested parties, moving from one to many and back to one, all without the hassle of printing out multiple copies and mailing them.

More than any other medium, e-mail lets you master your own schedule.
Writers work on deadline, and the process of composition is susceptible to all kinds of jars-the muse is sensitive and often obstinate.
A ringing telephone is intrusive; answering it, I must break my chain of thought and shift attention to an entirely new subject.
E-mail, however, lets me handle business when I have time.

I can save my correspondence for later in the morning if I choose, preserving those productive early hours for writing.
Then, ready for a break, I can respond to ten e-mail messages as a second pot of coffee is brewing.

As with all computer subjects, a high-tech name describes such processes - asynchronous communications .
The terms means that electronic mail uncouples you from the normal messaging train.
Call a phone number and encounter a busy signal-you've run into a brick wall, until you dial back, sometimes repeatedly, and make connections.
Dial that same number and reach a voice mailbox and you're into the realm of the asynchronous.
Processes don't have to occur simultaneously with this kind of communication; vou leave a message and the person in question will call back when time allows.
Electronic mail provides that same service, only the rate of return on e-mail, at least in my experience, is vastly superior to voice mail.
Maybe e-mail is just more enjoyable.

ELECTRONIC MAIL PROGRAMS 

The Internet is so huge that no one scheme works on all systems.

We're not talking about MS-DOS here, nor a single Macintosh on a desktop, but a network comprising a wide variety of operating systems.
You may be running an IBM-compatible computer, trained in DOS software applications.
Maybe you're dialing in with an Amiga or a Mac.
One way or another, you need to be able to deal with the various devices that make up the Internet.
Fortunately, most of the dial-up service providers are using UNIX as their operating system, and gives us a common language with which to work.
It also gives us a core program.

We will work with the UNIX mail program in our first log-on sessions.
We will then move to an increasingly popular program called pine , which goes beyond the spartan mail interface to offer useful screen help and a variety of interesting features.
We will also examine a third alternative, called elm , which is, in a way, a cross between mail and pine .
While easier to use than mail , the program is somewhat less intuitive than pine .
Having tried all three programs, your choice will depend upon your temperament.
I use mail for short notes and pine for the bulk of my work.
A little experience with each will soon reveal which holds the most appeal for you.

Bear this in mind: When you dial in to the Internet, you're going through several layers of complexity you don't face when dialing a commercial on-line service.
It's easy for me to call up CompuServe and start interacting with its host computers in Columbus.
I type a command, which gets sent to the host, which then does something about it, and gets back to my computer.
In this way, I can do various CompuServ-ish things such as sending e-mail, participating in forum discussions, conferencing, checking the weather patterns, and using on-line databases.

The same paradigm holds with a dial-up Internet account, except there is a wide variety of host computers.
The physical location where the message is stored is the host computer you're accessing, only now there's no centralized set of tools for use throughout the network.
The software on the machine at your service provider's site determines which tools you can use to read the message.
This is why I choose mail as our initial learning vehicle.

Because it's plain and ordinary and implemented throughout the UNIX world, mail is the program most likely to be found on the greatest number of dial-up systems.

WHAT IS MAIL? 

Numerous programs exist to handle Internet mail.
Most of them sport odd, Zen-like names of the kind favored by the UNIX community: elm, pine, mush .
The tendency toward bizarre cryptography persists in the UNIX world, as we'll see when we cover news readers for USENET, which sport such descriptive monikers as trn and nn .
If you want to learn more about UNIX alternatives to mail , a document available on USENET called "UNIX EMail Software-A Survey" works through the options from the standpoint of a systems administrator, the person who is responsible for setting up a UNIX system to communicate with the outside world.

What should a mail program be able to do?
The primary functions are obvious: It should make reading your mail intuitive and logical.
It should make it easy to reply to messages in your mailbox, and it should provide general housekeeping chores like save and delete functions, forwarding capabilities,insertion of text files into your messages, and more.
The user interface you select for your mail will gradually become second nature, but don't fail to explore the options available.
It may be that one of the other programs suits your temperament better than mail .

PUTTING MAIL TO WORK 

To activate mail , you need to be at your service provider's command prompt.
If you have any messages waiting for you when you log on, you'll see the following:
You have mail.

The message tells you one or more messages are waiting in your mailbox.

But assuming you're coming to electronic mail for the first time, at the command prompt you will see: No mail for username , where username is your user identification on the system.

The prompt is telling you the system is waiting for your command.

Type mail and you'll see the & symbol, otherwise known as an ampersand.
This is the command prompt for the mail program; it tells you the program is now active and waiting to be told what to do.
Here's an example of mail 's entry screen when you have messages waiting.
(I've modified the e-mail addresses other than my own to protect the innocent): xxx .

The information in the top two lines tells us that seven messages have been received, and that all seven are new (I'm seeing them for the first time).
We also receive the useful information that help is available by pressing the ? key.
We'll look at help options in a moment.
Next is a statement of the current mailbox in use; in this case, it's the file /usr/spool/mail/pag .

Examining Your Mailbox 

We're then given a listing of the messages in the mailbox.
Note that the messages are numbered.
In the example, the letters to the left of the message entries tell us something about the status of the message they mark.
Messages marked N are new; you haven't yet looked at either their summary line or their text.
A message marked with U is one you didn't look at even though it was in your mailbox the last time you checked.
U thus stands for "unread"; you saw the summary line last time but didn't read the message.
A P signifies a message that has been preserved; you've elected to leave it in your mailbox even though you've already read it at least once.

Notice that a "greater than," or > , symbol points to message 1, flagging this as the current message.
Any commands you give will take effect on the current message unless you specify a different message.
You'll always find the > marker pointing to your first new message or, in the absence of new mail, to the first message in your mailbox that's unread.

After the message status and number, we're given the address from which each message was sent.
Depending on circumstances, this may not be the originating address, but may be the address of a mailer that routed the message between you and the original sender.
Date and time information appear next.
If you look closely, you'll find the messages are listed in the order in which they were received.

Following the date and time is a set of numbers separated by a slash.
This shows the number of lines and characters in the message, a figure which includes the header information.
The subject appears last.

Reading the Mail 

To begin reading the current message, you can simply press the RETURN key.
The message will appear, as in Figure 7.1.

If the message runs to more than one screen, you can press the SPACEBAR to advance to the next screen.
Pressing the RETURN key will only advance one line at a time-definitely not the way you want to read your mail.

What if you choose not to read the current message?
In the case above, to read the fourth message, simply enter the number 4.

The message will then be displayed.
Thus: & 4 &lsqb; RETURN &rsqb; .

From which I retrieve the message in Figure 7.2.

Figure 7.1

A basic electronic mail message

Figure 7.2

A message retrieved by choosing a message number

The following is a list of some basic mail commands you'll use daily as you read through your mailbox.

&lsqb;RETURN&rsqb; Displays next message. 
p Displays current message. 
- Displays previous message. 
h Displays list of headers. 
d Deletes current message. 
u Undulates current message. 

Saving Messages 

The mail program doesn't throw away messages unless you give it a specific command to do so.
Messages are saved automatically into a file called mbox after being read.

When you've read your mail and taken no further action, you'll receive notice of this fact.
If I read through nine messages and then exited mail for example, I'd see the following:
Saved nine messages in /home/gilster/mbox .

Again, the /home/gilster/mbox statement simply tells me where the mbox file is located.
I could go back and reread these messages, or perform any of the other mail commands on them, by the expedient of re-invoking the mail program and specifying that I wanted to read the messages currently saved in mbox .
How?
Read on.

Reading Saved Messages 

Getting at mbox requires you to add a parameter to the mail command that invokes the program.
Entering mail -f mbox brings mbox up on-screen, where it will appear exactly as your first list of headers in the mail program did.
If I enter this command at my prompt, here's what I get: xxx .

With any saved text, the standard mail commands function just as they do when handling your new messages.

A brief word about your mailbox.
Many new users don't realize mbox is there and, as you would imagine, it can grow to remarkable size in a fairly short time.
UNIX users have a limited amount of disk space allocated to them; pushing the envelope past the point that will keep your administrator happy is bad policy.
But rather than deleting the entire mbox file (which you could do if you so desired), why not simply edit it periodically and throw out what you don't need? 

File management is the idea, and the following mail commands walk you through the tools available.
Learn them so you can keep your mailbox tidy.

Saving messages to a File 

If a particular message strikes your fancy, it's easy enough to save it to a separate file.
Use the s command to do the job, paired with a file name of your choice.
Because I write a newspaper column, for example, it's frequently necessary for me to save a provocative message for later consideration.
I typically type s column , which tells the system to save the current message in a file called column .

Each time I do this, the message is appended onto the existing column file which I usually let grow to ten or twelve messages before I print it out for scrutiny.
Multiple messages can be handled the same way by specifying their message numbers.
Thus s 2 7 8 column saves the designated messages to my column file in sequence.

Deleting Mail 

The d command can be used to delete the current message.
As I work through my new messages, for example, I'll use a d to delete the message I've just read, assuming I've decided not to save it.
Alternatively, you can delete one or more messages from the mail prompt by specifying them: d 1 2 6 deletes the messages in question.
Fortunately for those of us who are sometimes too quick on the keyboard, there's also a u command to take care of undeleting a file.
The problem is that you can only undelete a file during the current mail session.
Once you've given the command to exit mail , it's too late.

Assume I've just read a message and have thoughtlessly pressed the d key to send the message into limbo.
The command u 6 will bring it back.

Setting up folders 

If you're like me, you may receive a wide variety of incoming e-mail, much of it in the form of Internet or BITNET mailing list material from people you don't correspond with personally, the rest in the form of letters directed specifically to you.
To organize the e-mail load, consider setting up folders for your regular correspondents and areas of particular interest in mailing lists.

That way, when you want to save something and examine it later, you'll have a specific place to look for it.
You can respond to, add and delete files from your folder as easily as you can from the mailbox itself.

Folders are easy to establish.
Use the s filename command to save the desired messages in a file.
To manage the file, mail offers a folder command.
Think of a folder as a message file that mail can manipulate with its standard commands.
To move into it, you simply enter folder filename , which will load the messages in that folder into mail ; this works the same way as calling up your mbox file.

What is the difference between saving to a regular file and saving to a folder?
My column file is something I want to save for my own use, and I'm not worried about answering the messages in it or forwarding them to anyone else.
Once I've saved messages to it, I'm content to manage column simply by downloading it regularly to my computer.

Folders, on the other hand, are meant to be handled by the mail program.
The message that came in this morning might have a question you need to investigate before answering.
Filing it in a folder would allow you to store it until you had discovered the right answer.
Then, by using the folder command, you could use mail's command structure to respond to the message.

Think of folders as containing mail that's still active, messages you may yet want to respond to or manipulate.

Changing folders is simply a matter of invoking the folder command with the new filename.
A folder called nets is where I store messages about current happenings around the Internet, as sent to me by a mailing list called net- happenings .
The folder camelot is set aside for matters Arthurian, as routed to me from a site in Edinburgh by a list called Camelot.
Discussions of food and wine from the Foodwine mailing list reside in a folder called, not surprisingly, foodwine .

Responding to Messages 

Responding to a message is simple.
After reading it, use the r command (remember, your command operates on the current message).
A lowercase r replies to the sender of the message only.
An uppercase R replies to the sender and anyone else who received the letter.
(As we'll see shortly, electronic mail can be sent to a wide group of people simultaneously.)

You'll immediately be asked for a subject.
Try to be descriptive, but remember that you have limited space to work with, and you want the subject field to make some sense.
Having typed it in, you're ready to start your message.
The bad news is that mail's editing functions will likely disappoint you.

Perhaps you've been writing letters with WordPerfect in the office, or composing that new novel with Microsoft Word for Windows.
If so, prepare yourself for culture shock when you start writing with mail .

Just remember this.
All you need to do at this point is type in your message You must press RETURN at the end of each line.
Work about two-thirds of the way across the screen before doing so and check the line for errors before you press RETURN .
You'll notice that if you made a mistake in line 3 and you've already moved on to line 5, pressing the Up Arrow key will not get you back to line 3.
You can, however, work backward using the BACKSPACE key to correct an error on the current line.
This is where pine and elm show their superiority.
Both are full-screen editors, allowing you to move the cursor as necessary to edit your file; mail , alas, forces you to edit one line at a time.

Figure 7.3 shows a sample message, along with my reply to it.
Note that at the end of the message, we're back at the mail command prompt.
That's where the action starts.

Notice also in the example in Figure 7.3 that it wasn't necessary to supply an address, nor to give a subject.
mail does this automatically, letting us concentrate on what we have to say.
A single period (.) ends our message and sends it on its way.
Now we can move on to the next message.

Figure 7.3

A message and a response.

Aborting a message 

Sometimes you regret saying something even as you write it, and decide not to send your message.
If this happens, you can abort the message in mid-composition with Ctrl-C (hold down the Control key and press the letter c).
You'll be prompted whether you truly want to abort the message.
A second Ctrl-C aborts it.

The following shows what the process looks like.
I began to write a letter and then changed my mind: xxx .

You can, incidentally, also abort a message with the -q command.
More about this and related commands later.

Getting the Headers Back 

As you work through your messages, it will occasionally be useful to get an overall view of what's in your mailbox.
Maybe you've decided to go back in and delete unnecessary messages, or you want to move immediately to a particular message.
The h command at the mail prompt will restore your list of message headers.

The Extremely Useful :n Command 

You're reading through a long message and suddenly realize you don't have the remotest interest in it.
Nonetheless, every time you get to the bottom of the screen, there's more message to go.
What can you do?

Fortunately, the mail program provides for this eventuality.
If you're stuck in a long message, enter :n and you will be returned to the mail prompt (&) .
NOTE: You don't have to press the RETURN key after the :n command; it will take effect as soon as you enter it.
At the mail prompt, you can use the d command to delete the message and move on to the next, or exit mail altogether.

Sending New Messages 

The best way to learn mail is to send practice messages to yourself.
You can send a new message using the sequence mail login@address at the system prompt.
Thus, to send myself a message, I'd enter mail gilster@interpath.net , after which I'd be prompted for a subject.
After entering the subject, I type in my text.
When finished, a single period (.) followed by another RETURN ends the message and sends it on its way.

All of which is to remind you that message management is the core of effective electronic mail.

The message you just sent should blast its way right through your system and pop up in your mailbox.
Mail can be sent either from the & prompt (from inside mail ) or the system command prompt; it's your choice.

Looking for Help 

Remember that mail provides a help function, invoked by pressing the ? key.
Figure 7.4 shows what I see on-screen at Interpath when I press this key at the mail command prompt.

The commands in Figure 7.4 are not the complete set.
If you want to see the whole list, you can tap into the on-line manual that UNIX systems make available.
Enter man mail to call up this storehouse of information as it pertains to the mail program.
The output will be presented a screen at a time, allowing you to page through it.
This is convenient if you have time to read the manual on-line, but a print-out of the commands is preferable if your problem is complicated.

Using the Tilde Escape Commands 

Let's talk about forwarding messages for a moment.
You're reading your messages and come across one you'd like to pass along to a co-worker.
This happens all the time, for the networks are so big that we're constantly running across items of use to others.

Recently a friend wanted to know how to get the manual pages for mail to scroll.
Normally, the manual is set up so that you'll get its pages a screenful at a time, pressing the SPACEBAR to move to the next screen.
My friend wanted to scroll the output and capture the result to disk, after which he would print it out.

I sent e-mail to the system administrator, who quickly sent the solution.
You can save the mail section to a file with the command man mail > filename .

Figure 7.4

A help screen in the mail program

I was then able to send to my friend the administrator's message embedded in a message of my own by using a series of special commands.
These commands are preceded by the tilde character (~), common in the Spanish language where its presence above a letter indicates special pronounciation.

For our purposes, the tilde commands (sometimes called tilde escapes) help us with the process of sending messages.
Here's how they worked in this case: Starting a new message, I explained to my friend that I would include in the text the information he'd requested, in the form of a message sent to me from the system administrator.
I then typed ~m , a command that told mail to insert the system administrator's message into my letter.
I added a few more comments at the end and sent the message on its way.

Keep in mind that your command acts on the current message, and in the case of inserting a previous message, it will insert whichever message is current It's easy to perform the insertion, only to find to your dismay that you've enclosed the wrong letter.
Needless to say, this could lead to some embarrassment.
So be certain of what's current, or else insert the appropriate message number!

Figure 7.5 shows what mail looks like as you proceed to insert your text.
Note that I've used the ~m command to insert message &num;2 in my mbox queue into my message.
What I see is the statement Interpolating: 2 , as the host computer puts the message where I want it.
At the (continue) prompt, I finish my message and sign it.
Then I use the . command followed by a RETURN to send it.

Figure 7.6 shows what the finished message will look like on the receiving end.

The tilde escape commands you'll need most are the following (remember you can generate the complete list with a man mail command).

~c allows you to send a "carbon copy" of the message to another recipient 
~b allows "blind" carbon copies 
~v starts the vi editor 
~p displays the entire letter for review 
~h lists message headings, which can then be changed

Figure 7.5

A message with another inserted inside it

Figure 7.6

The final message with insertion

~r inserts a file into your letter 
~q cancels the letter you're writing 
~m includes the current message in your letter 
~f includes the current message in your letter

You'll note two sequences for inserting a message.
The ~m I used inserts a tab character in front of each line of the insert, which is what I wanted since I was quoting someone else's message, and the offset made that more clear.
Using the ~f command instead will insert the same text, but without the leading tabs.

Another important point: You must always insert the tilde escape commands at the far left margin of the page .

Otherwise, they won't work.

The following sections provide a closer look at the tilde escape commands.

CARBON COPIES 

What if I want to send mail to more than one user?
mail lets you create a Cc: field in the outgoing message area.
Anyone you list on this line will receive a copy of the same message.
Use the ~c command anywhere in the message (but as with all the tilde escape commands, be sure you enter it at the left margin).
Entering ~c gilster@interpath.net sends me a copy of the message you're currently writing.
On the other hand, if you don't want the message to be circulated elsewhere, just press the RETURN key at this line.

BITNET: The Art of the List 

ITNET is a fascinating resource for Internet users, but many long-time network aficionados don't take advantage of its power.

This network has proven a smashing success at its primary task, to link universities and create communications links between academic communities.
But because it relies on older communications protocols and focuses on academic subjects just as often as more general topics, BITNET isn't glitzy, and it doesn't get the media coverage the Internet is beginning to receive.
Let's face it-people don't rush out to get Internet accounts just so they can mine the gateway into BITNET.

What a shame.
The information found on BITNET is world-class, and if getting at it is harder than it ought to be, it's up to us to learn how to manage the connection.
Besides, BITNET is growing closer to the Internet all the time, with improvements in its basic protocols and new user interfaces sure to emerge in the near future.
An excellent resource for those hoping to expand an education or explore an idea, BITNET deserves more attention outside of the academy than it normally gets.
The last thing we need is to keep our universities shut off from the give-and-take of the rest of the world.
Networks, after all, are designed to make connections, not set up walls.
Let's explore.

WHY BITNET 

My mailbox says it all.
An average morning takes me traveling through a wide realm of ideas, one I've tailored expressly to match my interests.
A discussion of Anglo-Saxon England-was the burial site at Sutton Hoo a later artifact than is commonly thought?
Can contemporary blood types be used to analyze settlement patterns in medieval Iceland?
A look at computer networking-what on-line journals are about to be published, and what implications does the field of on-line publishing hold for research in a variety of disciplines?
A debate on multicultural ethics-what preconceptions do Americans take with them when they visit Japan?
What do the Japanese themselves think of foreign visitors?
A question on CD ROMs-which of the available CD-ROM players is the most reliable? 

Messages on all these topics and much more flow to me through BITNET, a computer network set up to foment creativity in the universities and to inspire our leaders in research and education to new and better work.
Because of its origins in the academic community, BITNET is intimidating at first blush to users of commercial on-line services like CompuServe and GEnie.
Shouldn't a network linking major universities, a tool used for communications between academic specialists, be off-limits for the rest of us?
Meeker souls may assume so, and so, too, may some academic users, a few of whom would prefer to keep their discussions entirely to themselves.
Human nature is immutable, it seems; once we've found a place we like, it's tempting to close the doors to everyone else.

And then there's the change in vocabulary.
Suddenly we're talking about LISTSERVs instead of mailing lists-a vocabulary foreign to many users of the Internet.
The way we sign on for discussions, because it's fully automated, is itself intimidating.
How do we sign on, and what happens if we make a mistake in what we tell the computer?
It's because of questions like these that many Internet users don't take full advantage of the resources available to them on BITNET, or they think of them only as an afterthought.

Besides, the thinking goes, isn't BITNET behind the curve when it comes to advanced networking?
Does it really have that much to offer? 

The answer is, BITNET offers much indeed.
And while it's true that its technology isn't state of the art, what counts are the resources behind the machines, and finding a way to reach them.
Exploration requires a certain single-mindedness-you don't go into a wilderness thinking you'll only explore those areas that make you most comfortable.
As you're about to see when you learn how to tap BITNET's mailing lists and, later, its file archives, this network is a challenge.
The advantage you'll gain by using it, though, is immense, because BITNET is a resource like no other.

Connecting 2,827 nodes, the network is operated by the Corporation for Research and Educational Networking (CREN), which supports education research, and development worldwide.
BITNET carries electronic mail and mailing list traffic; it also provides for document and program transfer among educational institutions and access to BITNET server machines.
For Internet users, there are almost three thousand readily accessible discussion groups on various academic topics, making this unusually fertile ground for the intellectually adventuresome.
The notion that such riches would be available to interested parties worldwide would have struck all previous generations of scholars as fanciful nonsense.

BITNET'S BACKGROUND 

Created in 1981, BITNET was envisaged as a way of keeping faculty members at our universities in communication with their fellow institutions.
For the concept, we thank Ira H. Fuchs, then Vice Chancellor for university systems at the City University of New York (CUNY), and Greydon Freeman, director of the Yale Computing Center at Yale University.
Fuchs had IBM's example to look at: He knew that the giant corporation's VNET network connected its programmers researchers, and managers worldwide, using IBM software and leased telephone lines.
As VNET developed, each link added to the chain was responsible for its own connection to the network.
VNET became a paradigm for what Fuchs and Freeman foresaw as a communications link for higher education.

CUNY was in some respects the ideal proving ground for such an experiment.
Both CONY and Yale had some experience using network software to connect their own computers; CONY, in fact, connected nineteen colleges across New York's five boroughs, and the linkage to Yale simply extended its reach.
Fuchs and Freeman studied computing facilities at various institutions, concluding that an IBM-based communications protocol would make sense, given the number of users supported by Big Blue's machines.
Folding into the concept the notion that computers could be used just as readily for textual data as computer programs, not to mention electronic mail, they began sending letters to schools with major IBM installations, encouraging them to participate in the new network.
Despite its reliance on the IBM protocol, the computers on the net range from IBM systems to VAX machines, UNIX workstations, and a number of other computer types, all communicating using the same protocol.

Once again, computer networking defeats the parochial limitations of operating systems and hardware.

The philosophy was straightforward: Each school was to pay for its own communications link to the network, and each would make it possible for at least one new member to connect to BITNET.
And as the network grew, each member agreed to move traffic bound for other members with no charge.
BITNET's computers use a "store and forward" method based on an IBM NJE communications protocol-this means that a file goes from one site to another by passing through a series of intermediate nodes.

Moving over 9600-bps leased lines, each file must be sent in its entirety from one node to the next before continuing down the chain.

If a connection between two nodes is severed, the file is simply stored until the connection is reestablished.
In the absence of alternate routing strategies, a site can therefore be cut off, as can any site relying on mail passing through its computers.
Imagine the early network as a tree, with its trunk at CONY.
Traffic to each host had only one path to follow, with the limitations that implies.

The system worked, but problems arose due to the nature of traffic flow in this kind of network pattern, or topology.
Slow network connections and a lack of redundancy hampered communications.
The solution was to move BITNET traffic using the Internet's protocols, adding the routing redundancy and higherspeed connections offered by the TCP/IP network.
In 1989, under the name BITNET II, BITNET was reorganized into regions, setting up computers in each as root nodes for that area.
These core nodes, in turn, were connected by high-speed data lines, forming in essence a high-speed backbone network for BITNET traffic.

The term "BITNET" stands for "Because It's Time" Network, a moniker that quickly began to prove itself accurate as the net grew.
After eighteen months, the fledgling network had reached into twenty universities, one of them-the University of California at Berkeley-providing connections throughout the West Coast.
By 1984, a hundred organizations were included, over five hundred by 1989.

BITNET's corporate name changed to CREN when it merged with the Computer Science Network, or CSNET (originally funded by the National Science Foundation) in 1989.
CSNET was discontinued in 1991, but CREN continues its robust work, organizing BITNET's far-reaching activities in support of education and research in a noncommercial environment.

IBM was more than an inspiration for BITNET; the company also provided initial funding for centralized network services with a 1984 grant.
This led to the establishment of BITNIC, BITNET's Network Information Center, and the grant included an IBM mainframe computer which would serve as the central information site for the network.
When the grant expired in 1987, BITNET's funding came solely from membership dues.
Today, CREN counts 530 members in the United States and Mexico, including universities, colleges, research laboratories primary and secondary schools, and government agencies.

But BITNET reaches beyond the United States and Mexico into more than thirteen hundred research sites around the world.
Among the most significant BITNET international connections are those to NetNorth in Canada and EARN (the European Academic Research Network) in Europe.
Both are loosely considered to be part of BITNET, though in fact each network is maintained individually.
NetNorth began as an agreement between eight Canadian universities in 1983, linking IBM mainframe computers.
EARN now connects over 750 computers in 24 countries, extending from Europe into Africa and the Middle East.

BITNET also links to networks like GulfNet in the Persian Gulf area, RUNCOL in Colombia, ANSP in Brazil and CAREN in Asia.

The list of member institutions included in BITNET, EARN, and NetNorth is an impressive one indeed, from the Universidad Nacional de Cordoba in Argentina to the University of Bahrain, from the Pedagogical Institute of Cyprus to the University of Helsinki.
There are links to Egypt, Hong Kong, Ireland, Hungary, Iceland, Peru, and India.
Never have scholars been provided as useful a communications tool for keeping research up to date and colleagues informed of developments wherever they occur.

BITNET's growth has propelled it into new terrain.
Networks are designed to perform precise functions, but they almost always lead to new implementations that couldn't have been thought of by their original designers.
So although the communications protocols that drive BITNET are different from those of the Internet, a "gateway" system has allowed users on BITNET to send and receive electronic mail from the Internet.
The growth in traffic between the networks encourages the idea that they will one day merge; however, the BITNET protocols do not support direct file transfer between the networks, nor does the nature of their connection allow Internet users to tap BITNET's computers interactively (although it is possible for BITNET users to retrieve files from anonymous FTP sites on the Internet by electronic mail, through a system known as BITFTP).

BITNET AND THE MEDIEVAL UNIVERSITY 

Before I explain the concept behind BITNET mailing lists, a few thoughts on what this network signifies.
In the early Middle Ages, Europe's schools were structured around a body of common knowledge which the scholar was expected to master.
Unlike today's higher education, with its few requirements and curricula targeted toward career goals, early education was based on the premise that students should master knowledge across a broad spectrum.

Their studies were not confined to a specialty like mathematics or grammar, but included rhetoric, the art of speaking well, and communicating.
Students were to acquire knowledge of geometry and astronomy, of dialectics and music.
These seven liberal arts, known as the Trivium and Quadrivium, encouraged the dissemination of a broad cultural inheritance, and led directly to the scholasticism whose legacy was the great European universities at Paris, Oxford, Bologna, and Salerno.
No student, whether studying law, medicine, or philosophy, could proceed without this rich grounding in truths then considered universal.

These notions, alien today, would come to fruition in the Renaissance, perhaps the last era in which people believed it was possible to master all human knowledge.
Distant as it seems, the medieval system has much to teach us.
Its scope was daring, its aim audacious, and today's intellectual accomplishments, from the equations that took Voyager to Neptune to the communications protocols that drive BITNET and the Internet, descend directly from it.

Today we think in terms of specialties, and indeed, knowledge seems inescapably bounded by the limits of what a single individual can master in a lifetime.
But we've become a culture of specialists to our loss, for the cross-linking of knowledge, the fertilization of ideas from a wide range of disciplines, is at the core of human inquiry.
There are times as I go through my mail, reading BITNET messages from scholars worldwide on subjects ranging from the Canterbury Tales to particle physics research, that I suspect Roger Bacon, Duns Scotus, or Thomas Aquinas would have been right at home with network communications.
In this as in other things, they are more modern than we imagine.
Our challenge is to equal their curiosity.

WHEN ANALOGIES FAIL 

E-mail is remarkably versatile, yet it places few demands upon the imagination.
We can relate it to its "real-world" counterpart-the U.S. Postal Service.
The analogy is clear and workable.
The Postal Service takes a physical letter, examines the address, and delivers it to the person listed at that address.
The electronic mail system takes an electronic letter, uses the routing information in its header to track down the recipient, and delivers it to his or her mailbox.
True, electronic mail is astonishingly fast, and its improvement over regular postal delivery is obvious.
But the basic concept-one-to-one communication through a central delivery mechanism, is one we're all familiar with.

Where e-mail strains the limits of the analogy, though, is when we extend it into new terrain.
If one-to-one delivery is what I think of when I speak of electronic mail, then how do we regard the one-to-many communication provided by BITNET's powerful LISTSERV capabilities?
Here, we are gathering mail at a central site and then distributing it to a group of interested people, who have specifically requested to receive mail in this way.
What the group has in common is a shared interest, and any members of the group may participate in the resulting discussion.
This is no longer a one-to-one but a one-to-many form of communication.

The two forms of mail have an evasive boundary, it's true.
I can send a message to a colleague across the country and include a list of other recipients by using the mail program's carbon copy capabilities or those of pine or any other e-mail program.
I can set up things so my recipients know who else is receiving the message, or I can shield that information by using blind carbon copies, as we saw in Chapter 7.
But even so, while I have enabled a one-to-many link, I haven't given it the institutional life or structure provided by a mailing list.
What I've done informally as a one-time occurrence, mailing lists implement as a regular way of disseminating information, with its own set of protocols and responsibilities.

BRINGING ORDER TO THE CHAOS 

Back in the 1960s, I discovered the joys of correspondence.
In those pre-desktop computer days, a typewriter was the tool of choice, and I used my Smith-Corona, a beautiful old model passed along in the family since the 1920s, to write letters to fellow science fiction enthusiasts around the world.
Each day, the trip to the mailbox was an adventure, because I never knew how many letters might be waiting.
I was seldom disappointed, and never happier than when a particularly fat envelope arrived from one of my correspondents, carrying a round robin letter.

These letters weren't one-to-one communications either.
You signed on to participate in a group discussion, whose topic could range far and wide.
When you joined, it was customary to send a photograph and a brief biography so other people involved in the letter would know who you were.
Then the letter would circulate.
Each month or so, you received an envelope with letters from seven or eight other people.

You read all of them and added your own comments to each.
The discussion was public and you received responses from everyone invoved.

Take the round-robin-letter concept and extend it into the world of electronic communications.
Those same seven or eight people would find it easy to move messages over a network, but the situation could quickly get out of hand.
Given that correspondents could reply to everyone and deliver the results the same day, the letter would circulate from person to person as if around the rim of a wheel, with no central source of organization.
Instead of one person having the cumulative letter at a time, everyone would have a more or less up-to-date version of it.
Anarchy would quickly reign as each correspondent added comments and differing versions shot across cyberspace.

Both BITNET and the Internet have set up structured mailing lists to counter such chaos, and they function remarkably well.
A centralized structure is imposed over the circulating material, usually with a single person supervising the entire operation.
Instead of bouncing and multiplying across the network, messages flow to the person in charge, who then sees that the discussion is moderated, or at least that each person's contributions become available for all to read.

Best of all, this material is then delivered to your electronic mailbox, in the form of a series of messages that keep coming in until you resign from the group in question.

BITNET'S MAILING LIST COMMUNITY 

Given BITNET's academic background, it's no surprise that the mailing will likely encounter on this network are often research-oriented.
BITNET's lists are populated with scientists, teachers, university librarians, and policy analysts.
And given the diversity of their studies, the huge range of available topics ensures there will never be a shortage of reading material for the enterprising network participant.
These lists proceed without fuss or fanfare.
They're a quiet and continuing dialogue between some of the best minds in our culture, one of the academy's best kept secrets.

How do you know what's available?
The answer is found in a document maintained by the BITNET Network Information Center, otherwise known as BITNIC, in Washington, DC.
This organization maintains a list of BITNET discussion groups which can be had for the asking.
The resultant document is large and contains the complete directory of what's current on the mailing list scene.
It's a critical document for your network library.

Figure 9.1 shows a small sample of what you'll see when you receive this list.
The section in question, drawn from the O-P portion of the list, covers everything from news in Pakistan to archaeology, from the PageMaker program for desktop publishers to Yale's Organization for Tropical Studies.
The name of each list is on the left, followed by the letter L.
The network address and description follow on the right.

BITNET lists range widely in subject and structure.
Some are general, covering broad topics like philosophy or the outdoors.

Others focus with laserlike precision: Early English Drama, Macintosh terminal emulation, Turkish studies.
Some disseminate official information, like severe weather outlooks for various parts of the country.
Others are loose discussions where anyone weighs in with an opinion and open debate reigns.
Needless to say, the topic has much to do with the level of activity on the mailing list.
A controversial subject may generate heated discussions and land fifty messages a day in your mailbox.
A quieter list may chug along virtually unnoticed until a flurry of new messages arrive to remind you of its existence.

Figure 9.1

A sampling of the master list of BITNET nuiling lists maintained by BITNIC

Incidentally, if you prefer not to scan through the entire global list of BITNET possibilities, there's a shortcut available.
Rather than sending the list global command to the BITNIC LISTSERV, try list global/topic .
If you were interested, for example, in physics, you might send list global/physics .
Use the same BITNIC address as above.
Later, we'll use this searching shortcut to target mailing lists for research purposes.
But you really should keep a copy of the global list in your filing cabinet for reference.

THE NICETIES OF BITNET PARTICIPATION 

BITNET's mailing lists aren't normal computer bulletin boards, nor should they be treated as such.
They provide an opportunity to bridge the seemingly insuperable gap between an academic community too often isolated from society and the community of interested lay people who can benefit from their continuing research.
BITNET is a tremendous medium for self-education, for following up on interests you thought you left behind when you left school.
It is a medium for exploring ideas and keeping up with breakthroughs in both the humanities and the sciences.

For scholars, the network is a platform for exchanging ideas.

Imagine talking to valued colleagues daily, whereas before your conversations were limited to occasional academic conferences.

BITNET does exactly what Ira Fuchs and Greydon Freeman intended: It promotes collaboration with distant colleagues and distributes news lightning-fast throughout the research community.
The ability to sit in on such a medium is one of the most remarkable features of your access to the Internet and its related outer networks.

So use it well.
Remember that serious work is being discussed here; the quality of the ongoing discussion depends directly upon the willingness of participants to bring new ideas to the table and to follow basic rules of propriety.
As a BITNET eavesdropper, you should plan on listening and absorbing before you leave any messages.
In most of the mailing lists I subscribe to, I'm purely a listener, taking the opportunity to learn from the ongoing discussions.
There's no point in jumping in unless you have something genuinely useful to add to the proceedings.
As you examine a new mailing list, then, the idea is to find out what the tenor of the discussion is, follow its byways, and benefit from the expertise you find there.
Each mailing list has its own feel, and certain conventions may have emerged to guide its activities.
BITNET lists can be surprisingly informal, but the usual caveats about avoiding sarcasm and easily misunderstood comments apply.
Another caveat, and this is a big one: Be careful about how you reply to a mailing list.
Remember the number of subscribers out there.
If you choose to send a message to a particular poster, you should ensure that you respond to his or her address only.
Mailing lists can become hopelessly clogged with inconsequential messages meant for one pair of eyes only, but accidentally distributed to the entire subscription list by a careless use of the reply function.

This can be more or less of a problem depending upon your relationship to the people subscribing to the mailing list in question.
But a sarcastic remark about someone's latest comment which you meant to pass along to a personal friend on the list might have implications for your on-line popularity if it were distributed to everyone.
Be cautious, and keep in mind that a mailing list is a public forum, designed for an audience of interested if diverse peers.
All will benefit when everyone plays by these simple rules.

In addition, note the following guidelines adopted by CREN as part of its acceptable use policy.
- Be consistent with the purposes and goals of the networks.
- Avoid interfering with the work of other users of the networks.
- Avoid disrupting the network host systems (nodes).
- Avoid disrupting network services.

These are, needless to say, broad statements.
To place them into context, CREN provides the following examples: 

Messages that are likely to result in the loss of recipients' work or systems are prohibited.

CREN networks are not to be used for commercial purposes, such as marketing, reselling bandwidth, or business transactions between commercial organizations.

Advertising is forbidden.
Discussion of a product's relative advantages and disadvantages by users of the product is encouraged.

Vendors may respond to questions about their products as long as the responses are not in the nature of advertising.

CREN networks may be used for the provision of services that support the needs and purposes of the CREN networks, and for which a charge is made, if the network is an optional mechanism for provision of this service for which no additional charge is made, and as long as the use of the service is consistent with the bandwidth of the network and the forwarding hosts.
Providers of such information may be nonprofit or for-profit organizations.

"Chain letters", "broadcasting" messages to lists or individuals, and other types of use that would cause congestion of the networks or otherwise interfere with the work of others are not allowed.

BITNET files will be limited to sizes determined and reviewed periodically.
(Note: The current limit is 300,000 bytes per file transmitted.)
I strongly suggest you study these guidelines.
Networks rely on our prudent use of their resources.

PUZZLING OUT A BITNET ADDRESS 

Armed with your master list of BITNET lists, you're in position to sign on and begin reading.
But first let's examine a mailing list address.
I'll choose the following entry: xxx .

After all, I'm from Missouri, and Mark Twain is one of my philosophical forebears.
To sign up for this list, I'll need to send mail.
But to whom?
This is not a conventional Internet address; it's a BITNET address we need to disentangle.

The differences?
Notice the lack of periods in the address, and the fact that it's all in caps.
Notice, too, the lack of a domain name like .edu or .com , the signifiers used with Internet addresses.
Instead, we're looking at a relatively straightforward address statement.
To make sense of it, realize that BITNET user names and host names obey certain conventions.
They're limited to eight uppercase numbers and letters.

The node , or computer in question, has a unique identifier, in this case YORKVM1 .
Each BITNET computer has such a node name, which identifies it to other computers.
The user ID, in this case TWAIN-L, is used in conjunction with the node name.
Thus we refer to this address as "TWAIN-L at YORKVM 1" .
This information is sufficient to allow another BITNET computer to find the address, but the Internet doesn't yet have enough to work with.

Fortunately, there are basic translation principles to follow.
Take the BITNET address and simply add .bitnet to the end of it.
In the above example, the BITNET node YORKVM1 thus becomes yorkvml.bitnet .
Now the Internet can route traffic as desired.
This method will probably work, and you should give it a try, but there are cases where mail addressed using this method will bounce.
Some computers understand this shorthand routing, some don't.
Here's the alternative.
Change the TWAIN-L@YORKVM1 to twain-l%yorkvm1@cunyvm.cony.edu .
In doing so, you're directing the traffic to a known BITNET gateway into the Internet (the node at CONY, the Ur of BITNET sites).

This procedure of sending BITNET mail through an established gateway is known as the percent hack , because of the percentage sign (%) which appears in its address.
The Internet will only handle messages with a single @ symbol in them.
This is why the percent sign is used here.
Another gateway besides the one above can also be employed.
You might, for example, route mail through mitvma.mit.edu .
Thus, if you were attempting to send mail to TWAIN-L by this route, you would send to twain-1%yorkvml@mitvma.mit.edu .
It's a long address, but it will work if the standard .bitnet suffix fails.

There are two addresses to work with in a BITNET list.
One is the site to which messages are routed; the other is the LISTSERV address, properly considered the place for administrative messages to go.
The Mark Twain lists rotates around the address TWAIN- L@YORKVM1 (or, in Internet-translated terms, twainl@york.vml.bitnet .
This is where messages from participants go, and from which they are dispersed to the entire list.
But the address for routine matters of list maintenance is listserv@yorkvml.bitnet .

Memorize that principle: The LISTSERV address is where you send routine administrative requests.
Memorize it again.
Its use will become clear in what follows.

LISTSERV AND THE PLEASURES OF AUTOMATION 

Before sending our sign-up message to the Twain list, a bit of background.
A particular protocol must be followed when you subscribe to these lists, not out of some longstanding computer tradition, but because of the necessities of handling automated traffic.
For LISTSERVs are indeed automatic.
The administrative to and fro involved with signing people up, removing them from lists, and what not, is handled by computerized list functions managed by a server.
Remember, a server is simply a program running on a network machine; it has its own user identification and can often accept commands sent by electronic mail.

Most servers you'll deal with run the LISTSERV program written by Eric Thomas, which means the commands are common to all machines running LISTSERV throughout the system.
LISTSERV began as a mailing list program created by Ira Fuchs and Daniel J. Oberst, but its quick growth and popularity created problems.
The people in charge of the various lists were responsible for signing up new subscribers and deleting those who wanted to leave.
For these volunteers, the work load quickly became too heavy to handle.

Revised LISTSERV, which Thomas wrote in 1986, overcame the restrictions of the earlier version by providing new functions.
The server could now maintain a list by handling subscription requests automatically, and data files could be maintained as list archives.

BITNIC maintains a number of useful files which we'll use to build up our own BITNET library.
With both files and electronic mail, our gateway access into BITNET precludes interactive usage of its facilities, so the process requires you to ask the server for specific data through a precise protocol.

The method is simple enough: You send mail to the server in question and the text of your message is interpreted as a command by that machine.
Your entry to a BITNET list is handled, then, by sending a properly formatted message to the correct address.

Let's use this method now to retrieve a core document called BITNET USERHELP .
To get it, contact the BITNET Network Information Center by sending mail to listserv@bitnic.bitnet .
Here's how the message will look as sent through the mail program: xxx .

Note that I left the Subject: field blank.
The command takes up the first line of the message.
Sending it, I receive in return a useful document containing material on BITNET's structure, the capabilities of its mailing lists, its links with other networks and more; there's even a suggested reading list.

USENET: Keeping Up with the News 

I'm not sure where I'd be without comp.risks , a moderated on-line discussion about the hazards associated with computers and high technology.
Enthralled with networks, we sometimes forget that computing takes place within a context of social responsibility, and the comp.risks newsgroup is a valuable check on unbridled technophilia.
On one day, for example, a quick check of postings revealed stories on computer glitches in a recent space shuttle launch attempt, safety-critical software, the security questions surrounding electronic mail, and more.
Moderated by Peter G. Neumann, the Forum on Risks to the Public in Computers and Related Systems is sponsored by the ACM Committee on Computers and Public Policy.
For those interested, it's also available as a mailing list.
Send to risks-request@csl.sri.com to join, or keep reading to learn how to keep up with its discussions through USENET.

comp.risks is but one of a profusion of newsgroups carried on USENET and dedicated to every conceivable subject.
In this chapter, we'll look at the variety available to you, and explain how you can sign up for newsgroups, or more precisely, how you can winnow out the newsgroups you'd prefer not to read.
A number of different programs allow you to manage newsgroup activities, and we'll look at one of them, trn , that makes following discussions easier by sorting the messages by subject.
Another major topic in this chapter will be the Internet itself, and how keeping up with USENET can help you stay abreast of new developments throughout the networks.

WHAT IS USENET? 

USENET is itself a network, but it isn't the Internet.
Think of BITNET, an autonomous network with gateway links into the Internet.

BITNET traffic flows over the Internet but the two are not synonymous.
BITNET uses its own set of protocols, called NJE/NJI; the Internet uses TCP/IP.
In the same fashion, USENET traffic moves over the Internet, but it also moves over other networks.
USENET began as an implementation of the UNIX-to-UNIX Copy Protocol or UUCP, but today, non-UNIX machines commonly participate in USENET, and UUCP is only one of the mechanisms carrying its traffic.
You can get to USENET and take part in its discussions because network interconnections make it possible.

USENET seems to mean "User's Network," although the term is questionable, since USENET's originators created the word from a contraction of "USENIX Network" (USENIX being the largest user group for UNIX).
USENET is thought of as "User's Network" today.
It was created in my part of the country by two graduate students at Duke University, Jim Ellis and Tom Truscott, in 1979.
The first two hosts were, reasonably enough, called duke and unc , and the initial software to carry the news traffic was written by Steve Bellovin, a graduate student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
The USENET notion began to spread when its founders distributed the early news software through USENIX.

Today, the network has grown to enormous size with virtually no organizational structure.
The key to USENET participation is that anyone, or any organization, can join; the only thing required is another machine with which to communicate.
Lacking a central authority, the network likewise lacks any centralized funding.
Each host on the network pays for its own transmission costs and allows traffic from other sites to flow.
USENET is thus a self-policing network, discouraging commercial use and enforcing certain standards of network etiquette solely by the power of peer pressure.
The lack of centralized enforcement can sometimes be exasperating, as heated discussions called "flame wars" spiral out of control and the ratio of noise to signal increases alarmingly on certain newsgroups.
For all that, though, USENET provides a vital and compelling destination for network users.

USENET NEWSGROUPS 

For the dial-up user, USENET newsgroups will seem in many ways familiar.
They're simply discussion areas where ideas can be exchanged.
CompuServe users will think in terms of Forums , DELPHI users in terms of Special Interest Groups or SIGs , GEnie users in terms of Round Tables , and so on.
But the concept is the same.

You can post a message on-line and read the responses to it that build up over time.
Because numerous people are reading the same material, a collection of such responses begins to accumulate.
All the messages written on the same topic are considered to form a thread ; that is, although they may be posted at different times and interspersed with other messages, they maintain a consistent subject matter.

You can subscribe to a particular newsgroup, page through it using a software reader, organize the messages according to threads so you can follow discussions better, add messages commenting on what people have said, and ask questions.
Often one thread will branch into another, as subjects begin to diverge and suggest new areas of investigation.
A good newsgroup can be a lively place, with well-defined personalities emerging amid an atmosphere of inquiry and excitement.
In any case, it's safe to say you won't be bored.

The number of newsgroups is increasing constantly (I found over seven thousand the last time I ran a check), and it's likely that even the most abstruse topic will find representation somewhere on USENET.

USENET TOPICS 

But there are differences between USENET and commercial on-line services.
Perhaps the most obvious is that commercial services keep tighter control over their topics.
You might be interested in investing, for example, and become involved in CompuServe's Investor's Forum.
If your particular interest was futures trading, you'd find a special message section devoted to the topic; if you chose, you could participate in that section alone.
The same forum would have sections for stock traders, the bond market, options, mutual funds, and a host of other investment topics.
All of this is inside a single forum, although, to be sure, there are other financial sources on CompuServe.
USENET, on the other hand, boasts a huge variety of newsgroups organized only by a very broad hierarchical structure.
They break down into the following major categories.

comp Topics for computer professionals and amateur computerists alike.
Here you'll find information on hardware systems, software, computer science, and various computer-related subjects.
Some examples will illustrate the diversity of the category: 

comp.ai Artificial intelligence discussions.

comp.archives Descriptions of public access archives.

comp.compression Data compression algorithms and theory.

comp.dcom.fax Fax hardware, software, and protocols.

comp.graphics.animation Technical aspects of computer animation.

comp.lang.c++ The object-oriented C++ language.

sci Research in the sciences is the organizing theme here.
These newsgroups are highly specialized and usually followed by professionals in their fields.

Some examples:

sci.bio Biology and related sciences.

sci.engr.biomed The field of biomedical engineering.

sci.materials All aspects of materials engineering.

sci.physics.fusion Fusion, especially "cold" fusion.

sci.virtual-worlds Modelling the universe.

soc Social issues and world cultures make up the discussions in the soc classification.
This can be one of the most intriguing areas of USENET, as the international topics draw comment from all over the world.
They're especially useful if you try to keep up with the news in a particular country.
Alternatively, if you have a sociological bent, you'll find material about cultural trends.
You can see from the following newsgroups how diverse the soc groups can be: 

soc.couples Discussions for couples.
soc.culture.bangladesh News and comments about Bangladesh.
soc.culture.celtic Irish, Scottish, Breton, Cornish, Manx, and Welsh issues discussed.
soc.roots Family history research and other genealogical matters.
soc.veterans Social issues relating to military veterans.

talk There's no shortage of talk on USENET or, for that matter, on any other computer network.
The ability to put views into widespread circulation holds a certain compulsive charm to many people, even those who normally keep their thoughts to themselves when not on-line.
The result is debates, sometimes tendentious, often interesting, on topics without obvious resolution.
Care to sound off about gun control?
Abortion?
Health care?
You've found the place.
Here are some recent topics:

talk.bizarre The unusual, bizarre, curious.

talk.philosophy.misc Philosophical musings on all topics.

talk.politics.mideast Debate over Middle Eastern events.

talk.religion.misc Religious and ethical issues.

Remember to bring your sense of humor when you get into these newsgroups.

news A critical area, news is the section of USENET that focuses on happenings around the Internet.
You'll find announcements of new newsgroups, changes in software, postings of background files, called FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions lists) for particular newsgroups, and the answers to common questions.

Some examples:

news.admin.policy Policy issues about USENET.

news.announce.important General announcements of interest to all.

news.future The future of network news systems 

news.newusers.questions Questions and answers for users new to USENET.

rec These are the hobbyist groups, such as: rec.aquaria Keeping fish and aquaria as a hobby.

rec.arts.drwho Discussion about the TV character Dr. Who.

rec.arts.movies Discussions of movies and movie making.

rec.arts.wobegon Focus on the "Prairie Home Companion" radio show 

rec.aviation.ifr Flying under Instrument Flight Rules.

misc This category comprises anything that doesn't fit comfortably within the other categories.
Predictably, its interests are wide and often have nothing whatsoever to do with computers.
Witness the following examples: 

misc.consumers.house Owning and maintaining a house.

misc.jobs.offered Announcements of positions available.

misc.rural Issues concerning rural living.

misc.kids Children, their behavior, and activities.

Think of these newsgroup categories as the core of USENET; they're circulated worldwide, although they do not make it into every network with USENET access.
Any site can decide not to carry one or more of the distribution varies.
Remember, USENET lacks a central organization means there is no control over who gets a particular news feed or how individual articles are sent out through the net.

There are, in fact, a set of alternative hierarchies for newsgroups that have also gained some currency: They're not carried everywhere either, often because they may interest only a limited, or because they may be quite lengthy and/or controversial.

alt The alt category is broad.
Some of these newsgroups are excellent discussion areas; others are trivial.
But the idea is to let people say what they want, and you can tune out any newsgroup that doesn't suit your tastes.
And be advised: There is some excellent material within the alt hierarchy.
Some sample groups:

alt.aeffle.und.pferdle German TV cartoon characters.

alt.alien.visitors UFO sightings and more.

alt.books.reviews Book discussions.

alt.gourmand Recipes and cooking.

alt.radio.scanner Radio scanners.

alt.internet.services Questions and news about what's available on the Internet.

Whatever your interest, there's likely to be somebody discussing it in one of the alt newsgroups.

bionet High-level, professional discussions among biologists.

bit A useful grouping, bit is the hierarchy where the more popular BITNET mailing lists can be found on USENET.

You might want to get involved with these if you'd prefer not to receive BITNET lists in your mailbox.

biz These are groups with a business tilt.
As you'd expect, the focus tends to be on computer products and services, but broader items of interest to the business community are also discussed.
This is the place to be if seek news about a new product or an enhancement to an old one.
Some examples:

biz.comp.telebit Support of the Telebit modem.

biz.sco.announce SCO and related product announcements 

biz.dec Digital equipment and software.

biz.jobs.offered Position announcements.

clari ClariNet is an electronic publishing service providing a live feed from the Associated Press wireservice.
The news is collected and converted into USENET format before being posted.
It's a subscription service, so not all servers will offer ClariNet.
For those that do, here's an example of the kind of material you'll find in this grouping: 

clari.biz.economy.world Reports on international economic issues.

clari.biz.market.dow Tracks market activity.

clari.canada.briefs.west Regional news from Canada.

clari.feature.mike_royko The popular Mike Royko column.

clari.news.europe European events.

gnu This group is set up for discussions by and about the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
The FSF was established with the charter to remove restrictions on copying, redistributing, and modifying software, meaning anyone could copy and distribute a program without worrying about constraints such as licensing agreements.
The Foundation's take on all this is to produce free software replacements for some proprietary software.
This project has focused on GNU, an operating system that provides compatibility with UNIX.
GNU, another acronym (and a recursive one at that), stands for "GNU's Not UNIX".

gnu.announce Status and announcements from the Project.

gnu.emacs.vm.bug Bug reports on the Emacs VM mail package.

gnu.misc.discuss Discussion about GNU and free software.

kl2 Discussions of interest to teachers and students from kindergarten through high school.
Thus:

kl2.chat.elementary Informal discussion among elementary students, grades K-5.

kl2.chat.junior Informal discussion among students in grades 6-8.

kl2.chat.senior Informal discussion among high school students.

msen Offers articles from the Reuters news service in a variety of newsgroups.

vmsnet For users of Digital Equipment Corporation's VMS operating system and participants on DECnet, the worldwide network using the DECnet protocols.
DECnet is sometimes called the DECnet Internet.

Be advised, too, that local hierarchies exist; interpath.info and interpath.helpdesk , for example, are available at Interpath, my service provider here in Raleigh.
The first handles basic newsgroup information about the services Interpath provides to its customers.
The second fields questions related to the network's operations.
You subscribe to and read these groups the same way you do any newsgroups, but their distribution is limited, and postings on them are of regional or local interest.

USEFUL USENET LISTS 

Since there are thousands of newsgroups, how do you know what's out there and, better still, how do you subscribe?
The first question is answered by noting there are places on USENET where information about such matters is routinely posted, thanks to the good offices of a battery of volunteers.
Somehow these individuals find time in their schedules to produce helpful indices, commentaries, and background information that anyone on the network can use.
You will learn how to sign up for USENET newsgroups shortly, but for now, note two sources you'll want to keep in your permanent file.
After you have gone through sign-up procedures, you can get them on USENET itself.

READING THE NEWS 

Dial-up users shouldn't have any problem visualizing what happens when they read USENET newsgroups.
The list of newsgroups is located at the service provider's site, and when new users first sign up for an account, they are automatically signed up to all the newsgroups.
By using a news reader program located on the host computer at the service provider's site, you can read through these groups in a variety of ways, depending on the capabilities of the news reader you choose.
You can resign from newsgroups and sign up for new ones.
You can read through older postings, save messages as files for later downloading, include parts of messages in your responses, and tailor your news environment to meet your own needs.

The dial-up process is not terribly different from what happens when you read a DELPHI SIG or a CompuServe Forum.
In both, you participate by telling the system to go to the particular area in which you're interested.
You read the messages by using system commands, corresponding to the news reader commands you'll use with USENET.
You page through the messages, telling the system to present messages by threads, so you read everything on a particular topic before moving on to the next one.
If you're a CompuServe user, you may use a program like TAPCIS to automate the process, capturing all your waiting messages, then taking you off-line so you can reply when the meter isn't running, and returning on-line to upload your responses.

With USENET, you have a different set of options to work with.

Commercial on-line services have one command structure that allows you to read their forums, unless you use an off-line downloader like TAPCIS.
Your USENET access, however, is more flexible.
A number of programs can be invoked from the UNIX command prompt to help you read through the newsgroups.
Instead of telling the system to take you to a forum or SIG, you tell the service provider's computer to activate one of the news readers, which automatically presents the USENET newsgroups to you.
News readers have typically cryptic UNIX-style names; they're called rn , or nn , or trn , or tin .
All of them give you a basic interface and a way to page through the newsgroups, and all have their virtues.

For the purposes of our discussion, I'll be working with trn .
The program trn , written by Wayne Davison, is commonly available at UNIX sites.
Using it is a flexible and intuitive process.
As opposed to rn , the warhorse of news readers and the most ubiquitous of them all, trn provides one crucial advantage: it's a threaded news reader.
You can read the newsgroups with rn, but you'll be reading them out of subject sequence unless you go to considerable pains to arrange your work session by noting which messages are on what topic and then telling rn message by message which you want to read.
That process is tedious enough that you won't want to do it more than once.
So we'll use trn as our newsgroup primer program; later, you may want to evaluate other possibilities.

CONFIGURING TRN 

As with mail and elm , getting trn to work is simply a matter of entering its name at the command prompt.
But first, a problem needs addressing.
If you're a first-time user, you're probably going to find you're subscribed to all the newsgroups at your site.
Unsubscribing is easy enough; you just type a u at a newsgroup prompt, as we'll see, and you're out of there.
But then you realize you're at the top of a very long list, being led through it in prompted fashion one newsgroup at a time.
Newsgroup after newsgroup comes up.
Do you have to unsubscribe to each one individually? 

My first entry into USENET, through The WELL in San Francisco, was an eye-opener.
I knew I wanted to read several newsgroups having to do with computer security issues, but I didn't know how to find them.
And before I could read anything, I had to page through hundreds upon hundreds of newsgroups, telling each whether I wanted to subscribe to it.
I did what most novices do in such a situation: I worked through the entire list, the whole time thinking there was probably some easy-to-use mechanism that would allow me to handle the problem in a few minutes, if only I could discover it.

Later, I learned I was right and that I wasn't alone.
Every day on newsgroups like news.newusers.questions , someone asks how to avoid going through the entire list of newsgroups, unsubscribing to each.
The answer is to open up a special file and make some relatively simple changes to it.
But this seems like brain surgery to most dial-up users, who are probably more comfortable with a menu structure and a more intuitive command system that lets them sign up for what they want and leave the rest alone.
There is also the problem of determining which newsgroups we want to subscribe to in the first place, without having to go through each and read it long enough to make that decision.
If it strikes you that USENET and the UNIX tools available aren't designed with user-friendliness in mind, you're absolutely right.

Creating .newsrc 

Nonetheless, the rewards of USENET are worth the effort, and editing the file in question turns out to be comparatively trivial.
Let's plunge ahead by invoking trn .
Call your service provider and enter trn at the command prompt.

What you'll see next should look something like Figure 11.1.
Now enter a q at the prompt, to close trn .

We've just done something significant; the message in Figure 11.1 will help to show what it is.
At the top line the program tells us it's trying to set up a file called .newsrc .
This is going to be a core file for our USENET participation, because it's responsible for telling the news reader which newsgroups we're interested in following.
When you run trn for the first time, the program looks for this file; if trn doesn't find .newsrc , it will create it.
Contained within the .newsrc file is the list of newsgroups available through the server at your site.

Generating a Newsgroup List 

Let's get that newsgroup list now, because it will help us make decisions about what we want to subscribe to.
Turn on the capture buffer in your communications software.
Then, back at the system prompt, enter cat.newsrc to cause the .newsrc file to scroll across the screen.
The file will be shown without interruptions. 
(If you had wanted to pause at the end of every page, you could have entered a more .newsrc command, but in this case we don't want to do that, because we want a clean copy of the file.)

Figure 11.1

invoking trn for the first time

When the file has finished scrolling and you're back at the command prompt, turn off your capture buffer and print out the .newsrc file.
Keep this list by your side as we proceed to make newsgroup decisions.

Shutting Off the Spigot 

Now we'll tackle the problem of too many newsgroup subscriptions.
If you look at the list you've just captured, you'll see how many newsgroups are available from your service provider.
The .newsrc file is set up under the assumption that you are subscribed to each of these.
This is why it provided you with the prompt we saw earlier: xxx .

In reality, the choices available are greater than the prompt suggests.
If you possessed an unusual frame of mind, and really wanted to work through the list of newsgroups one by one, the following would be the choices available to you:

y Read the articles in question now 
n Don't read these articles now. 
q Exit from trn. 
+ Show a listing of available articles. 
c Treat all the articles in this group as read. 
u Unsubscribe to this newsgroup.

Some people like to examine each choice and make a considered decision even if it takes hours or days to work through the entire list.
I did this myself so I understand the impulse.
If you choose to set up trn this way, call the program back up by entering trn at the prompt and proceed to do so.
And cancel this afternoon's golf game.

But assuming you'd prefer the simpler solution, let me show you how to edit the .newsrc file to remove the problem.
I would much rather be signed up to no groups whatsoever, and go back to add the ones I choose to read, than signed up to all of them.
We can edit .newsrc with the common vi text editor to produce exactly this result.
As you'll recall from Chapter 7, vi is the text editor from hell that causes non-UNIX people to wish they were computing on Macintoshes; its the flip side of the term user-friendly.
So be careful with vi .
Remember that if you make a mistake, there's an easy way to correct it.
We can always erase a bungled .newsrc file and then start from scratch.
The command would be rm.newsrc , at which point we could start the whole process over.

And if this happens to you, a brief word of caution.
You may be at the system prompt, deciding to find your .newsrc file by running an ls command.
This is fine, except that when you look at the listing of files in your home directory, you don't see .newsrc .
Not to worry, for .newsrc is a hidden file, which will not show up with the standard ls filter.

To see it, type ls -a , the command that lists hidden files along with nonhidden ones.

NOTE: You may wonder why we use vi to perform these editing chores, rather than the far simpler pico .
Unfortunately, while pico possesses many virtues, it does not handle search and replace actions.
And what we are going to do in the .newsrc file will require a global search and replace operation.

Getting .newsrc into vi 

To call up .newsrc in vi , type vi.newsrc .

What you should see will approximate Figure 11.2.
I say "approximate" because these newsgroups are specific to my site at Interpath.
But your vi rendition of .newsrc will be the same in that it will show the local newsgroups available through your service provider.

To proceed, take a good look at what's on your screen.
Each of the news groups listed is followed by a colon.

The colon indicates that these newsgroups are all subscribed to at the moment.
We want to change that by telling .newsrc we're not subscribed to any of them.
To do that, we'll turn each of these colons into an exclamation mark.
The process of changing all of one item into another is called a global replace and it's not difficult to do.

Figure 11.2

Calling up .newsrc in the vi editor

The Search and Replace Option 

Here's how to handle it.
You need to get to the colon prompt (:) in vi .
As we saw in Chapter 4, this text editor works through two different modes, one a command mode, the other an insert mode.
Command mode allows you to enter commands while insert mode is used to add text.
Using the ESC key will take you out insert mode and into command mode.

Begin, then, by pressing the ESC key.
Now enter a colon (:), followed by the command shown below.
Your command, including the colon, should look like this on-screen: xxx .

When you've entered this command, press the RETURN key.
The substitution will take place.
If you examine the file again, you'll find that the colons have indeed been replaced by exclamation points.

You can now exit vi and save your changes by pressing ESC again, followed by a colon (:) and then wq .

This command takes you out of the text editor, leaving you a message like this one: xxx .

Now you're back at the command prompt.

What to Do if Something Goes Wrong 

If you botch the editing job on .newsrc (an understandable situation, given vi 's intricacies), don't be alarmed.
We can always remove the broken .newsrc file with a rm.newsrc command at the system prompt.
Then, when we start trn again, the program will create a brand new .newsrc file for us to work with.
Proceed to perform the global search and replace on it and you will soon be up and running.

KNOWING WHAT TO READ 

At this point, you are unsubscribed to everything.
Now you need to make some additions to trn ; you have to tell it what you are interested in reading.
You can begin by calling up the program from the command prompt: xxx .

You'll see the following message: xxx .

A good thing we have that list of newsgroups, which we can use now to begin our USENET participation.
I'll choose news.announce.newusers because it's an important stopping-off point for novices.
Many of the basic questions you'll have as you wade into USENET will come up again and again here, along with their answers.

To add this newsgroup, tell trn to go to that group with the g command: xxx .

You'll get this response: xxx .

The answer is obvious.
Choose y for yes, and you'll be whisked to the newsgroup.
You're not actually re subscribing, of course, but trn doesn't know that.

Choosing y , you'll be prompted again: xxx .

There may not actually be 236 postings waiting for us to read; many of them may have been taken off-line by the system administrator to save disk space.
But my recommendation would be to reply with a c .
This command tells trn to consider all these messages read; next time you sign on, then, you will start with messages that have accrued since you gave this command.

Our goal right now is to set up trn for future use.
Your first priority should be to get the relevant groups on your subscription list and then proceed to learn the basics of reading them.
Type a c at the prompt and you'll see this: Do you really want to mark everything as read?
(yn).

Choose the y again, and you'll see: Marking news.announce.newusers as all read.
End of newsgroups what next?
&lsqb;qnp&rsqb;.

Now you have some reading ahead of you.
Take out the printout of the newsgroups we produced earlier and make yourself a cup of coffee.

What you want to do is scan through these groups carefully, with an eye toward determining which will be of continuing interest.
Your decisions aren't crucial; any group can be subscribed to, unsubscribed from, and resubscribed to at any time.
The reason you want to spend some time with this process now is that it's easy to miss an interesting group and then spend months on-line before seeing a reference to it that makes you wish you had joined it long ago.
You'll be prompted when new groups are created, so you won't fall behind in your subscriptions to them, but good older groups are easy to miss.
So spend some time with your newsgroup list and decide which groups are worth your time.

Then, using the above principles, start signing up.
Use the g command followed by the name of the newsgroup you want to subscribe to.
Some of the groups will be interesting beyond your expectations; you'll be delighted you subscribed to them.
Others will be unexpectedly quiet, with only a message or two a week; some won't have any traffic for long periods.
Some will be so busy that you'll finally decide you don't have time to spend on them, and you'll unsubscribe.
But these are decisions that can only be made with experience, and as you work through your first week or two of USENET activity, you'll begin to see how newsgroups fit into your routine.
The beauty of the process is that you can tailor it explicitly to your own interests.

THE CORE NEWSGROUPS 

In certain ways, the heading of this section is a misnomer; these newsgroups are not necessarily core groups in the sense that everyone is expected to read them.
But some newsgroups can make the life of the new USENET participant a great deal easier.
The following lists some I think you'll find rewarding, and I recommend you sign up for them in your first go-around.

news.announce.important A moderated conference with general announcements of interest to the entire USENET community.

news.announce.newgroups Announcements of the formation of new newsgroups.

news.announce.newusers Basic explanations of USENET conventions for new users.

news.answers Periodic USENET postings appear here, making this a good newsgroup to follow to monitor the network.

news.newusers.questions Your chance to ask questions.

You should avail yourself of this opportunity, as you have USENET experts worldwide standing by to help you.

alt.internet.services Useful discussions of Internet issues.
You can learn a great deal by following this group.

When you have added the newsgroups that interest you, it's time to exit trn .
If you followed my advice in signing up for groups (using the c command to mark all the messages as read), you will be caught up in all of them; trn will show all your newsgroups as read.
You should, therefore, be at a prompt like this one: xxx Assuming you are, choose the q command now to exit.
This should take you back to your system prompt.
Because you've marked all your groups as being read, you'll need to let some new messages appear before proceeding.
It won't take long; the network remains busy, and the traffic in some newsgroups is remarkably heavy.
Come back to USENET later in the day and you should be ready to read the new messages that have accumulated in your absence.

USING TRN TO READ YOUR NEWSGROUPS 

One advantage of trn is that it's a simple program to use, although it offers options that can make it both more complex and more powerful.
As we've seen, you start it by entering trn at the system prompt.
This time you should be shown a prompt asking you whether you want to read the material in your various newsgroups.
It will look like this: 

Unread news in news.answers 30 articles 
Unread news in news.newusers.questions 12 articles 
Unread news in news.software.readers 5 articles 
Unread news in comp.mail.misc 6 articles etc. 
unread article in news.answers -read now? +ynq 

As noted before, the suggested commands inside the bracketed box aren't the only possibilities, but they do represent the ones you'll probably use.
A y will cause the first article to appear.
An n will skip this newsgroup and take you to the next one.
A q will quit trn altogether.

Choose a y now to display the first article.
You'll see a screen like the one in Figure 11.3.
This is a USENET message, or part of one; it's also called a posting.
We're in the newsgroup news.answers , as can be seen from the top of the message header.
Notice that this is a moderated newsgroup, meaning messages don't just accumulate here at random, but are sorted and presented through the intervention of a USENET volunteer, who is acting as the publisher of this collected material.
Moderated newsgroups, you'll find, often provide more valuable information in less space than their unmoderated cousins, because a good moderator will make sure the material stays on track.

Figure 11.3

A typical USENET message 

Tracking Down Information 

"A cookbook approach just won't work," said Jane Smith, assistant director of the Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval.
"These tools are changing so fast that as soon as you explain how to use one of them, the information will be obsolete". 
We were discussing resource finders, tools like WAIS and World Wide Web , which are the subject of this chapter, in the lobby of MCNC's Center for Communications.

The Clearinghouse supports and promotes the use of network tools like these.
It's even testing a new generation of systems that add features to the WAIS engine, developed by Thinking Machines Corporation, which we'll discuss shortly.
And Smith was right.

What to do?
Resource discovery is one of the Internet's fastest moving targets.
Breakthroughs seem ready to occur in a host of areas, and useful client software is proliferating to take advantage of the deepening information pool.
At the same time, battles rage over which tool is the right one for the job.
Maybe you think Gopher is the information engine for the 1990s; someone else is a fan of the powerful Wide Area Information Servers ( WAIS ) concept.
Others argue that the debate is irrelevant; the tools tie together in a common task, to locate resources and exploit them.

And what models do we use?
Should directories of information about the Internet be maintained at some central site?
Should they be widely dispersed but connected, allowing for maximum utility and accuracy?
Who's in charge of the operation, if anyone, and which standards will come out on top?
The answers, as we'll see, don't come easy.

In the meantime, you and I have work to do.
Faced with the challenge of the skeet shooter, trying to hit a rapidly moving target with some fast moves and a weapon that sprays shot over a wide area, I'll try to show you a bit of both worlds.
On the one hand, there's a publicly accessible WAIS server we can use for practice.
Although some of what you see will have changed by the time you access it, the core principles should remain, and my descriptions will give you an idea of what WAIS is all about.
We'll also travel by way of Telnet to CERN, the giant European research laboratory, for a look at World Wide Web .

WIDE AREA INFORMATION SERVERS 

On-line text, as we saw in earlier chapters, is proliferating.
But text, for all its utility, presents formidable retrieval problems.

WAIS , the Wide Area Information Servers system, was developed to address such searching.
The idea is to let the user search for a combination of keywords by sending search strings to the appropriate WAIS server machines.
Each of these servers offers one or more collections of documents available for the search routine.
Documents that contain the specified keywords are flagged, and the information is returned: hierarchical order based on the frequency of each keyword and the distance between keywords in the document.
The documents your search flags can then be requested from the server and displayed on-screen.

The client/server model is the key.
The client is the program you deal with as you enter your queries and refine them; it's what you see as you work with WAIS .
The server is where the data you're after is stored.
You're using the client to connect with one or more servers each time you run a WAIS search.

The benefit of the WAIS protocol, which handles the byplay between client and server, is that it allows the client to work with simple English search terms.
The client will convert these into the protocol, which transmits them over the network to the server.
On the server end, the results of the search are processed and retransmitted back to the client via the same protocol.

WAIS and the Luck of the Irish 

You'll understand WAIS better if you ponder the alternative to using it.
There are hundreds of WAIS servers, for example, containing material accessible through other means.
A database of recipes can be found through the WAIS database called usenet-cookbook.src (the .src suffix means you're dealing with WAIS ; it stands for "source").
These recipes are largely those that have appeared in the USENET newsgroup rec.food.cooking .
They're also available at an anonymous FTP site, gatekeeper.dec.com .

If all you knew was that a recipe for Irish stew existed somewhere on the Internet, you could go after it in two ways.
Through anonymous FTP, you'd to the site.
Once on-line there, you could change to the pub/recipes directory and look for what you need.
Note how directed a process this is.
You have to know where the site is, and which directory at that site to examine for what file.
You have to find the specific file and retrieve it.

Here's the WAIS alternative: By querying the WAIS source usenet-cookbook.src, you could tell your client program to search for the term irish stew.
The software would handle the protocol conversion and query the server, whereupon a series of articles might be obtained that mention Irish stew.
The benefit for you, the end user, is in search time; the WAIS software does the work for you, leaving you with the relatively trivial task of searching through the results to find which of the retrieved titles look close to what you want.
Having made that decision, you could then have the full text sent to your mailbox.

Looking for something like Irish stew in a recipe database, you'll likely find that one WAIS search does the trick.

Broader search concepts, however, can call for a different technique.
Using relevance feedback, you can progressively refine your search to track down just the information you need.
This allows you to select particular results of the search and mark them as relevant.
You can then run the search a second time.
The server takes into account the documents you've marked and looks for others that bear similarities to them.
This generally means those documents that share a large number of common words.

A New Paradigm for Searching 

If you've ever used DOW Jones News/Retrieval, you've experienced something similar in the company's DOWQUEST service, which was the first commercial system to put relevance feedback to work.
DOWQUEST brought a new paradigm to the search process.
In the past, the DOW Jones text databases of newspaper and magazines articles had always used standard Boolean search techniques; indeed, these methods are still available today.
Users have to specify exact search words and connect them with Boolean terms like AND or NOT to show the desired linkage between the items.

DOWQUEST threw away the Boolean connectors.
The precise syntax of searching gave way to something more akin to brainstorming.
You list words that play a major role in your subject and turn DOWQUEST loose.
Looking for material on scheduling software, for example, you might enter the terms calendar scheduler personal information manager .
No connecting terms are required, and the order of the words is immaterial.
DOWQUEST goes out and retrieves a list of hits that contain these terms.
You can then flag the best examples from this list of documents and ask the service to run the search again, this time finding more documents that are similar to the ones you liked.

Relevance feedback is a powerful search engine; in the hands of skilled searchers, it offers broad retrieval capabilities.
But what's even more encouraging is that the technique holds out the promise of effective searching for those without the inclination to master conventional Boolean methods.
The relevance feedback capabilities we will examine here through the WAIS access program called swais are not well developed; they're difficult to use and not always effective.
But the WAIS engine that works behind them is continually being refined.
New client programs will tap relevance feedback more efficiently, making our searching an increasingly natural process.
In this way, WAIS points in the same direction that the Internet at large seems to be taking, toward wider access and a set of intuitive, rather than exclusive, search tools.

We have researchers at Thinking Machines Corporation, a producer of massively parallel computers and information retrieval engines, to thank for the initial work on the concept; the company's Brewster Kahle conceived WAIS , and it was developed jointly by Thinking Machines, Apple Computer, KPMG Peat Marwick, and DOW Jones and Company.
Thinking Machines has made a public-domain version available that will run on many systems; the company also markets a commercial implementation.
Kahle, who remains a figure in WAIS ' development, now runs his own company, WAIS Inc.
For him, the definition of his product is a simple one.
" WAIS is an infrastructure," Kahle says, "helping people ask novice questions of large collections of information around the world".

A Multitude of Data Sources 

The other powerful component of WAIS is its combination of data sources.
Putting together a wide variety of databases is useful, but the sheer prolifelation of data presents search problems.
You might spend your time retrieving what you need from one database, only to realize that two others also contain relevant information.
I run into this problem all the time.
An online search through CompuServe's Magazine Index Plus database finds an article I need.
But I know DIALOG contains databases covering different journal sources; I'll have to try there, too.

Only DIALOG and CompuServe use different interfaces, and their billing structures vary widely.
Both, in turn, are different from Dow Jones News/Retrieval.
Because of this, tracking down articles on a particular concept can take all afternoon, and burn up plenty of money.

Using WAIS , on the other hand, you have the ability to specify multiple databases to be searched sequentially, the results appearing in a list, ranked according to those items that most closely meet your criteria.
The end user can thus tap a variety of databases through a single user interface and with one search.
It's as if I could tell all the information services that I needed to search under a specified set of terms.
By running one search, I could query across the board, and would have only one list of results to work with.

WAIS can be powerful indeed, but the very proliferation of data sources creates a problem.
Useful as WAIS servers are, how do you know how to find them?
There are currently six hundred WAIS databases available on servers throughout the world.
Fortunately, there are some ways around the problem.
Thinking Machines maintains a Directory of Servers.
The Directory can be queried like any other WAIS database, returning information on the servers most likely to be useful in finding a given topic.

The WAIS Protocol 

Why does WAIS seem to be taking off?
A major reason, surely, is the fact that the protocol driving it is open.
(The protocol is known as Z39.50 by the National Information Standards Organization; it has been supplemented to meet the needs of full-text information retrieval).
The idea is that WAIS can't work unless there are enough databases out there running the protocol to make this search tool viable.
By publishing the specifications for the protocol, Thinking Machines thus spurs development of a wider market.
The result: a growing number of information providers who have reason to support the WAIS project and to develop servers that will function under the protocol.
Another key is the active work of CNIDR, the Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval.
A specific goal of CNIDR is to develop a public-domain WAIS implementation, testing WAIS systems with improved features.

Fortunately, the protocol is hardware independent as well, eliminating the problem of developing a solution under one hardware system and being unable to apply it to others.
Since the WAIS software can manage data negotiations with a variety of hardware and software platforms, providers are not constrained by their existing equipment and can develop WAIS servers confidently.
Although the original client software was developed, for example, on the Apple Macintosh, programs now exist for a wide variety of operating systems.
We should expect this development to continue as WAIS gains in popularity and utility.

The WAIS Support Consortium exists to address questions relating to the spread of WAIS and its future direction.
There will be much to consider.
Intriguingly, although the basic Z39.50 protocol was developed to manage bibliographical retrieval tasks, it was extended to handle more than text.
Internet users will be able to use WAIS to retrieve video and audio materials, provided they have access to the high-end workstations necessary for the job.

A Basic WAIS Search 

Let's go right to the source for our first look at WAIS by moving to the WAIS client running at Thinking Machines Corporation.
Connecting there will require us to Telnet to quake.think.com , entering wais as our user name at the login: prompt.
The variant of WAIS we'll be using here is actually called swais , for "screen WAIS ".
This is a character-oriented interface, WAIS in its baldest form.
What we'll see at login is shown in Figure 13.1.

Browsing WAIS for Sources 

What's available through WAIS ?
After the sign-on at think.com , we will see one of two possible menu structures.
The older of the two, and the one in place until recently, is what you see in Figure 13.2.
It is a listing of available WAIS databases, one which can be paged through to see all of the new sources.
Note the range of possibilities here; on this one screen there are databases on acronyms (useful indeed in a rapidly changing telecommunications arena!), aeronautics, a WAIS nexvsgroup, and a network resource guide.
And we're still in the A listings.

This older screen shot reflects the situation at this site before a recent change of interface took effect.
As this book was being revised, Thinking Machines changed the swais interface to reflect the fact that there are now so many databases available.
The situation had become unwieldy, as is explained in the next screen you are likely to see at this site, as shown in Figure 13.3.
The new, spare interface is shown in Figure 13.4.

The interface you encounter isn't critical.
At Thinking Machines, it is likely to be the simplified one, which offers you, instead of a long list of servers, a searchable index from which to choose your sources.
If you want to see the other interface, you can Telnet to sunsite.unc.edu , logging in as swais .
There, the list of sources is offered as shown in Figure 13.5.

Figure 13.1

Logging in to WAIS at quake.think.com 

Figure 13.2

The basic swais menu

Figure 13.3

A new interface is introduced at quake.think.com 

Figure 13.4

This lean interface allows you to query a directory of WAIS databases

Notice that the sunsite.und.edu. list shows 593 databases; the older list at Thinking Machines (in Figure 13.2) showed 454, but the number has grown much higher since, ant the new interface at think.com indexes virtually all the WAIS databases that are available.

Figure 13.5

A more conventional list of WAIS sources at sunsite.unc.edu .

swais uses a text editor called ex which, in keeping with UNIX programs like mail and vi , offers an inscrutable command structure.
It's possible to play around with swais without knowing anything about ex , but to avoid frustration, you should at least generate a list of basic swais commands at the prompt.
This is done by typing a question mark (?) at the prompt.

What we get in return is a list of the commands in question, as shown in Figure 13.6.
We now log off by pressing the q key.

Running a Sample Search at SunSITE 

Although I have just given you a quick look at quake.think.com , I am going to use the sunsite.unc.edu site for most of the work in this chapter.

This is the WAIS interface that is most familiar to people, and it is possible that the quake.think.com site will return to it despite the problems of dealing with a lengthy number of servers.
On the other hand, to cover all the bases, at the end of this section on WAIS , I will present a sample search session at Thinking Machines to demonstrate how to use its implementation.
That demonstration will be clearer after we have gone through several sample sessions at sunsite.unc.edu .

Let's begin, then, by using Telnet to access sunsite.unc.edu .
At the prompt, enter swais as your login.
The login screen is shown in Figure 13.7.
Be careful here; when you are prompted for a terminal type, the default is "unknown"- don't, in other words, enter a RETURN or the system won't know the kind of terminal you are using, and you may get an odd screen display.
Be sure to type vt100 when asked for terminal type, as below: xxx .

The WAIS database listings will now be loaded.

Note that you can page down or up in the listings; the j or Down Arrow key takes you to the next listing down, while the k or Up Arrow key moves you up.
A highlighted bar moves when you press these keys; pressing the SPACEBAR with the highlight on a particular database will mark that database for a search.

Figure 13.6

Retrieving the swais help screen.

Figure 13.7

Logging in WAIS at University of North Carolina

Since our topic is WAIS anyway, let's search the alt.wais database .
To do so, we'll use the arrow keys to move the highlighted bar to item 13 (these numbers change as new databases are added to the WAIS library).
wais.oit.unc.edu , a WAIS server at the University of North Carolina, is a database created from the postings in the USENET newsgroup alt.wais .
Maybe you're beginning to get a feel for how useful WAIS can be at this point.
One of the problems with the USENET groups is that to use them as research tools, you have to be able to identify and read older postings.
WAIS is showing us how to do just that.

Press the SPACEBAR, then, with the highlight on item 10, and you'll see an asterisk pop up by that item.
This tells us item 10 is now marked for our use.
We can search this database if we can decide on appropriate search terms.
Let's try to build up some background information on WAIS .
One way to do that is to search for terms like sources, which may give us background information on WAIS servers.

To begin the search, we'll follow the screen directions again, entering a w to open up the keywords field.
We can enter both sources and wacs as our search term, looking for any entries that contain both words.
There's no need to include an and in the search; this isn't Boolean searching, and including the word would just set swais looking for all documents containing the word and.

As you can see, WAIS takes some getting used to, particularly if you have any background searching databases by more traditional means.

swais will prompt us for search terms by popping up a keywords field.
Here, as shown in Figure 13.8, I've just entered sources and am about to enter wais.

Pressing the RETURN key begins the actual search, which causes the client to translate the search terms through the WAIS protocol and send them to the appropriate server.
We wind up with the result shown in Figure 13.9, a list of files WAIS found that contained the desired search terms.

Give this list some scrutiny.
There are items here that are clearly germane to the task at hand.
The items called WAIS -discussion digest look promising; they seem to be archives of one or more of the WAIS mailing lists that circulate in the Internet community.
Surely they would contain updated information on new WAIS servers.

Figure 13.8

Beginning the search with swais

Figure 13.9

Results of the first search with swais

We can scroll through this list to examine documents.
Retrieving a relevant document is simple enough; we'll simply place the highlight over the document and press the SPACEBAR , following the directions at the bottom of the swais screen.
Soon the message scrolls across the screen.

But before we examine any documents, let's take a closer look at the search results screen and see what it's telling us.
Note the two columns on the far left.
One gives us an ascending list of numbers, the other a score.
WAIS is looking for the most likely candidates for our search results.
From the information we've given the system, those results with a perfect 1000 score are the closest to what we're looking for (at least as far as our software knows).
Indeed, if we start looking at the top of the list, we'll find WAIS-discussion digest &num;5 leading all comers, and a number of other such digests as well with high-priority listings.
We can browse through them on-line by pressing the SPACEBAR after positioning the highlight bar over the document we want.

WAIS-discussion digest &num;5 turns out to be an interesting summary of WAIS -related news, including articles on WAIS in commercial settings and a listing of new source materials.
But as we look through the assembled materials, perhaps the best document on sources turns out to be another that ranked high on the original swais hit list, WAIS-discussion digest &num;6 , which includes a useful directory of sources compiled by Chris Christoff.

The content of each is examined and they are grouped into categories to make for easy searching.

Christoff's document gives us a broader idea of the range of WAIS servers.
Many of them hold materials from various USENET newsgroups.
Some contain bibliographies, while others include reports, abstracts, and papers under various subjects, many of them technical in nature.
It's natural enough to find a heavy concentration of computer materials here, but there are also resources like ERIC, an archive from the Educational Resources Information Centre, reviews of major works of science fiction, materials on a variety of world religions, useful archives of zip codes, weather information, documents from such groups as the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Project Gutenberg, and more.
You'll find the working documents from the Internet Engineering Task Force here, along with discussions related to the commercialization and privatization of the Internet.

In Chapter 9, I showed you how to search for various BITNET mailing lists.
It's satisfying to see such lists becoming available through WAIS .
The WAIS procedure is much quicker than going through BITNET search protocols, and provides a higher likelihood that you'll find the information you need.
In addition, WAIS remembers search strategies.
You can run a search in multiple databases at once, significantly cutting down your search time, and can flag multiple hits to be sent in batch mode to your mailbox.

We can now leave this search by pressing an s, which takes us out of an individual document and back to the list of sources.
To deselect the alt.wais database, press the SPACEBAR again and the asterisk will disappear.
To exit swais , press a q , as shown at the bottom of the screen.

Taking WAIS South of the Border 

Now let's run a more complicated WAIS search, showing off some of the capabilities of swais .
This time, we'd like to look through more than one database at a time, and we'd like to home in on our target by using relevance feedback techniques.
Let's see if we can extract some potentially useful investing information from the WAIS system.
In particular, I've heard that Latin America may be an emerging area for economic growth in the early part of the twenty-first century.

If I wanted to learn more about those economies and how to invest in them, how could I use WAIS ? 

The place to begin is with the Directory of Servers maintained at Thinking Machines; it will give us a chance to scan through the numerous WAIS databases to see which ones are most suited to the task at hand.
This directory is also an information center about the WAIS servers themselves; as we'll see, you can learn more about the holdings of each quickly, helping you to make decisions about which may be valuable.
Logging in again at sunsite.unc.edu , then, we look through the menu of servers until we see the entry marked directory-of-servers , which is item 197.
(Of course, this number will change as new databases are added).

Remember that to page through the swais menus, you can use the j key to go to the next page, while the k key takes you to the previous page.
But there is another way to do this.
Since we are looking for a specific server, we can use the /dir command to take us to any servers starting with the word directory.
We can then move using the j or k key to find the exact server we want, which is listed as directory-of-servers .

The search strategy for the directory is somewhat different from other databases because of the nature of the information it contains.
Press the SPACEBAR with the highlight on this entry and an asterisk will appear to show that we've selected the directory-of-servers as our search target.
Pressing the w key, as before, pops up the keyword menu, allowing us to enter the search terms we're after.
I'll enter several that seem workable, again omitting common words like and and the .
Since Latin America is our focus, let's try that.
Our search strategy is latin america economy stock market .
Figure 13.10 shows the results.

Figure 13.10

Searching for information on Latin American economies: a first run of results

But what's this?
A number of items clearly don't apply, and some we're just not sure of.
Here's one called agricultural- market-news which may or may not be useful (does it involve commodities in South America, such as coffee?)
.
Here's another called IUBio-flystock-bg .
From the acronym and cryptic title, we can't tell much about this one.
And surely great-lakes-factsheets can't have much to do with our topic?
Let's find out.

To learn more about these servers is a simple proposition.
Simply press the SPACEBAR with the highlight over the server in question, and the directory will produce a background screen on what that server does.
Figure 13.11 shows the background screen for agricultural-market-news , which does, in fact, take itself out of contention when we inspect it-note that coverage is of the United States only.
What's happened here? 

A similar inspection of the IUBio-flystock-bg entry quickly rules it out as well- it's an "index of the Drosophila fruitfly stocks maintained by the stock center at Bowling Green USA."
Has WAIS gone berserk? 

Not berserk, perhaps, but running up against its own nature.
WAIS is looking for databases that meet our search terms.
But we've given it terms that can be interpreted in various ways.
When we tell the WAIS directory we want servers dealing with the stock market, we have to bear in mind that WAIS will look just as diligently for the term stock as it will for stock market .
The result is a hit about fruitfly stocks , which is in no way what we're looking for.
But give WAIS credit.
If you look at the numerical rankings for these sources to the left of the list, you'll see that only one receives a score of 1000.
WAIS is telling you that none of these are close matches.

Figure 13.11

Background information about the agricultural-market-news database

Widening the Search 

Maybe we should work on our search terms.
We're looking for information about Latin America and its various economies.
But we've been too specific thus far in our search.
There may well be large amounts of WAIS information out there in servers whose charter is to cover broader themes.
So, rather than searching under stock market , let's broaden the search to terms like economy and finance , leaving latin america in the search.
We'll go back to our list of sources by pressing the s key, as prompted at the bottom of the swais screen, and then use the BACKSPACE key to back up and erase our previous search terms (after entering a w to return to the keyboard field).
Now we'll enter the new ones and once again press the RETURN key.
The results of that search are shown in Figure 13.12.

This list, however, remains unpromising.
What we're running into is that economic and financial information remains relatively untapped by WAIS servers.
We've also seen a limitation of WAIS -it pulls up hits with no connection whatsoever with the topic in hand, because of the way it searches for the words we give it to look for.
In this case, we're faced with having to look through these sources to see if any of them apply.
We can use the SPACEBAR to look at each entry and, indeed, the one called academic_email_conf may have some interest.
It's a database of information about newsgroups and electronic conferences.
Although South and Central America do not yet maintain a strong presence on the Internet, let's see if some of these discussion groups have something to show us.

To do this, we'll search the academic_email_conf source.
We need to move back to our list of sources by pressing the s key; then we need to find the relevant source by paging through the swais screens, using the page up and page down commands shown in Figure 13.6.
(Or we could, as before, search by giving the / command, followed by the word academic , which should take us directly to the server-this certainly beats paging through screen after screen!).
Soon we locate the database, use the SPACEBAR to place an asterisk by it, and activate the keyword field by pressing the w key.
One hint: Don't forget to use the SPACEBAR to deactivate the directory-of-servers database before you move to the academic_email_conf list.
If you do forget, swais will search both directories at once, a result we don't need.

Figure 13.12

Still limited results of a broader search under economy, finance, and latin america

Because swais has preserved our original search terms, and because we'd like to use them again, all we have to do once we've selected the academic_email_conf database is to press the RETURN key.
Now swais returns forty items that meet our criteria, all of them mailing lists or some type of on-line discussion or news feature containing the search terms we're after.
We need to look through this list now, shown in Figure 13.13, to see which of these hits seem particularly relevant.
For those, we can use relevance searching to sharpen our tools.

Relevance Feedback Techniques 

Let's give relevance feedback a try.
We'll use the r command (lowercase only- case is important here) to mark those documents (or, in this case, conferences) we think are close to what we want.

Confusingly, you'll see no response on-screen when you do this, but rest assured, swais has marked the entries, as we'll see in a moment.
soc.culture.latin.america , a USENET newsgroup, seems clearly applicable, as does the third entry, which seems to be a mailing list devoted to economic issues.
We'll mark both of those with an r .
Finally, we'll mark the eighteenth entry, a database of economic and financial stories from ClariNet.

Having marked a number of groups, we're not sure which ones we've called relevant and which we've left alone.
An r command will redraw the screen to show just those entries we thought were significant; another r command takes us back to the basic results screen.
I like the first entry as well-it's devoted to issues of business and finance, as I can see from pressing the SPACEBAR to read its description.
So let's mark it with an r .
Now we have four relevant entries culled from the forty we started with.
At this point, we need to rerun the search, letting swais go through our results and apply its feedback techniques to the effort.

Figure 13.13

Results of a search of the academic_email_conf database

The Future of the Internet 

Anyone who has lived through the incredibly short evolution of the personal computer knows how hazardous it is to predict the future.

Nonetheless, certain trends seem certain to gather momentum as the Internet continues to grow.
Experiments in audio and the transmission of video images, including live broadcasts from Internet Engineering Task Force meetings received worldwide over the so-called multicast backbone (MBONE), point to a bright future for multimedia messaging and the delivery of a new category of product over a medium once relegated to text.
The appearance of Internet Talk Radio in March 1993 only confirms this movement, as listeners worldwide gained access to a half-hour show on the Internet delivered via binary data.

We're also moving toward something called the National Research and Education Network (NREN), an overlay on the existing Internet in the U.S. that has the promise of vastly increasing bandwidth and promoting a host of services in the home.
Precisely what shape the NREN will take isn't clear, and is the subject of continuing controversy.
But in some fashion, wider access to computer networks, along with the benefits of digital audio and video, will change the way business and home users gain information, with inescapable consequences for our libraries, our schools, and our government.

Access is the issue
who gets to take advantage of these wondrous new capabilities?
Part of that question is already being answered, in the form of the surge in dial-up users of the Internet.

A few years ago, getting Internet access meant working for an organization whose network was already connected.
That usually meant a school, or a research laboratory, or a government organization, and it always meant one network tying into a larger network, which is, after all, where the name "Internet" comes from.

Today, we're moving into the era of the individual user.
As we've seen, getting an individual account on the Internet is easier than it has ever been, because a new class of service provider has entered the market.
This is a trend that's sure to accelerate, and as it does, the Internet will begin to open up.
Network visionaries sometimes speak of Internet connections becoming as common as telephone jacks; buy a new home and your Internet hookup is already wired in.
This seems fanciful at present, but the enfranchisement of the individual user is a step in that direction, and powerful demand may well validate the concept over the course of the coming decade.

COMMERCE TAKES TO THE DATA PACKETS 

All of this represents quite a change for the Internet.
It wasn't that long ago that Internet access belonged to faculty members at universities, research scientists, and similarly restricted population groups.
That image, of a sober, almost staid network buzzing with arcane discussions limited to a highly select audience, is gradually changing.
How else to explain the cartoon character Dilbert, who appeared being "sucked into cyberspace" in one of the newspaper strip's more colorful episodes.
At the end of the cartoon, readers found a message from the artist: "Internet ID: scottadams@aol.com" .
The message elicited an appreciative ripple on the network, as denizens of several different mailing lists commented on the widening popularity of their favorite medium.

Nor is the new attention on the Internet limited to artists.
One day in February 1993, the Palo Alto Weekly carried a full-page advertisement for the Alain Pinel Realty Company of Saratoga, CA.
The ad featured photographs of each of the 35 realtors who work for the agency.
Under each picture was an Internet address.

The notion that you might be able to bring the Internet into your discussions with the local realtor startled some, but ponder this: The great bulk of the Internet consists of local area networks, or LANs, inside larger companies.
And while some parts of the Internet do exclude commercial activities, others do not.
Anyone hoping to move commercial traffic over the Internet has the option of using a provider that places no restrictions on the type of content carried.

Thus the explosion in commercial use.
In fact, while fifty percent of connected hosts are governmental or academic in nature, fully nine out of ten new connections go to commercial sites.
Want to order a book on-line?
You can do so on the Internet, through the Online Bookstore at Software Tool & Die.
Want to cut publishing costs and make life easier on editors?
Addison-Wesley already uses the Internet to receive book proposals and perform basic copy editing chores.
So does Oxford University Press, just down the road from me in Cary, NC.
A number of large corporations, including General Motors and General Electric Co., are using the Internet to aid in corporate research, not to mention benefiting from electronic mail communications.
Apple Computer has even made its System 7 operating system available by anonymous FTP from apple.com .

"By June of 1991," says Internet Society president Vinton Cerf, a key figure in the development of the original TCP/IP protocols, "fifty percent of all registered hosts on the system were commercial.
That's an important metric; commercial use is the Internet's fastest growing component".
Infoworld estimates that some five-hundred thousand new commercial users now prowl the network.

The confluence between government and private industry will be interesting to watch as plans for furthering the Clinton administration's National Information Infrastructure continue to unfold.
Consider what is happening in Silicon Valley a harbinger of things to come.
Smart Valley Inc., a nonprofit consortium, and Enterprise Integration Technologies, a local consulting firm, have received a $4 million boost from the federal government, along with matching funds from the state of California.
The aim: to build CommerceNet, a low-cost, high-speed Internet access provider.

With backing from Apple Computer, Hewlett-Packard, Lockheed Corp., Pacific Bell, National Semiconductor Corp., and Sun Microsystems, the project has clearly caught the attention of business.

CommerceNet, like many other Internet newcomers, will likely serve as a testbed for advanced network concepts, including the introduction of multimedia into a variety of on-line offerings for both home and business.
Just how we manage the necessary tweaking between government and industry is an issue that continues to preoccupy those concerned with the future of the network.

And ponder this: While the attention of the press has been focused largely on the so-called "information highway," offering future digital wonders piped directly to the home, the Internet spent 1993 doubling in size.
The best current estimates cite as many as twenty million users, with commercial entries accounting for three-fourths of all new growth.
In fact, Anthony Rutkowski, vice president of the Internet Society, told Fortune Magazine that sixty-three percent of the networks now registered worldwide belong to business or to the research laboratories they maintain.

On the face of things, this is an odd situation.
What the Internet lacks is security; in fact, the idea of sending mission-critical data through its matrix would bring shudders to most system administrators.
Nor, as we have seen, is a network that is largely driven by UNIX commands an easy one to master, especially for the nonspecialist.
How, then, to account for the stunning commercial interest? 

The answer doubtless lies in the network's potential, as opposed to its present capabilities.
No one denies that networking is the wave of future business growth; corporations large and small plan to catch that wave today.
They're experimenting with everything from electronic mail as a replacement to courier services to archival sites available through FTP for their remote offices.
The Internet is being used by some as a wide area network, connecting corporate sites in various countries; for others, it becomes the enabling device for the establishment of the "virtual corporation"-the company that is basically a cluster of communicating, independent freelancers.

Here in North Carolina, three telephone companies-Southern Bell, GTE, and Carolina Telephone-are building the North Carolina Information Highway (NCIH).
The first tenant of the NCIH will be the state, which has sunk some $4.4 million into the technology to network the first 104 sites statewide.
Moving out of an initial grid of medical centers and schools, the state intends to reach some 3,300 locations by the end of the decade, linking government offices, the prison system, and more.
And while government will be the anchor tenant of the NCIH, the telephone companies plan to tariff services for a wide variety of business users.

With video applications on demand and the capability of moving massive amounts of data over a newly installed fiber network, the NCIH attracts business interest because of its undeniable potential.

Corporations can benefit through remote training, workgroup collaboration, data sharing, and a host of other capabilities whose impact won't be felt until they can be tested in the field.
The Internet is not an information highway in this sense, but surely it is interest in exploring network possibilities that has driven so many firms into acquiring their own network addresses.

And it is likewise undeniable that today's services electronic mail foremost among them-are in active use today.
In January 1994, IBM's employees exchanged some 580,000 messages with customers and suppliers; Big Blue is one of many firms whose e-mail access is changing the way business is conducted.
Add in shared resources, such as the ability to tap into a workstation from a variety of sites, and you begin to see a business picture that includes widely dispersed productivity-enhancing tools and, perhaps, lower costs in terms of transportation and telephone bills.

Meanwhile, a new breed of entrepreneur has taken to the data paths.

Joel Maloff runs The Maloff Company in Dexter, MI.
Maloff, a former vice president at Advanced Network & Services, provides seminars nationwide at which interested business people can learn more about the Internet jmaloff@aol.com .
He is joined by other active promoters of the network, including Rob Hertzberg, who edits the Internet Business Report , a monthly out of Manhasset, NY, which targets the intersection of networking and commerce (rob@ost.com) .
In Washington DC, Jayne Levin's The Internet Letter covers network developments with a keen eye on political and social implications (netweek@access.digex.net) .
And ponder the fortunes of Internet World , which has grown into a full-color glossy monthly out of its origins as a small, quietly circulated newsletter (meckler@jvnc.net) .

And don't be surprised to see this wave of commercial interest result in the appearance of the first Internet shopping malls.
The publisher of Internet World , Mecklermedia, aims to open up an electronic shopping center in 1994, coordinating the development of a wide range of businesses, all reachable through an Internet interface.
The Westport, CT publisher is a pioneer in a commercial landscape that doubtless will soon feel the effects of promoters and developers.
Rival O'Reilly & Associates is already using a hot interface tool called Mosaic to provide Global Network Navigator, which is part catalog, part interactive magazine, and part testbed for new concepts.

THE INTERNET AND THE FUTURE OF THE NEWSPAPER 

The number of personal computers in the homes and offices of America continues to swell, even as the number of newspaper subscribers dwindles.
Somewhere in there, given the continuing need for in-depth news, is an opportunity, and ClariNet Communications Corp. of San Jose, CA, has seized it.
Its ClariNet is a commercial news service that draws on United Press International and a host of other sources including Newsbytes, a computer press service, to present the news in electronic form on the Internet.

A network that wants to distribute ClariNet News signs a contract with the company, which allows it to carry a series of newsgroups on USENET with the prefix clari .
By subscribing to particular groups of interest, the network user can create a customized news service, targeting precisely what the user is interested in and ignoring the rest.
The news stories then appear as individual items in the groups subscribed to.
More information on ClariNet can be obtained by sending e-mail to info@clarinet.com .

Included in the newsgroups are headline news items from Reuters and The Associated Press, along with columns on politics and entertainment.
Book reviews and sports coverage appear, as does local news for thirty-five regions in the U.S. and Canada.
Techwire features stories on science and technology, while the Business News focuses on financial stories from stock market reports to the commodities market.
One service to watch is Matrix News, a newsletter covering the growth of networks worldwide.

Another provider, the Msen Reuters News Service, offers its clients a full range of Internet services, everything from shell accounts, a local bulletin board system, USENET news, and all major Internet features including Telnet and FTP.
Included in the Msen package are Reuters news and business wires, broken into areas such as financial, international, and other categories.
This news, like that offered by ClariNet, moves in the form of USENET newsgroups.
For more information, contact info@msen.com .

HPCwire, a service of Select News in San Diego, CA, is another interesting entry in this field, offering news stories of interest to the high-performance computing community.
The mechanism here is delivery through electronic mail.
Subscribers contact the service (sub@hpcwire.ans.net) to receive regular mailings that list the articles available in that issue.
They can then choose what they want to read and respond with an electronic mail message requesting those specific articles.

Services like ClariNet and Msen Reuters News Service are provided on a subscription basis; your service provider may or may not have them.
But the potential of the Internet as an information delivery tool for news services is clear; delivery services bring a more structured format to the chaos of USENET, and offer a unique way of filtering the news for people whose time is short (and whose isn't?).
We're probably going to see an explosion in the delivery of such materials, spreading outward from the highly focused academic newsletters and journals now commonly available to services with an emphasis on high readership potential.

Nor does the expansion of electronic news stop at subscription services delivered over the network.
Many newspapers are now considering becoming Internet service providers in one fashion or another.
The San Jose Mercury-News , for example, has become a fixture on America Online, with a combination of news and features.
The full text of the Mercury-News' classified advertising is provided, as is, by surcharge, access to the paper's news archive.
 
The Chicago Tribune has likewise taken a position on America Online, exploring the benefits of electronic news delivery.

Here in North Carolina, The News & Observer of Raleigh has gone one step further.
Not content to publish through a third party, the newspaper has become an Internet service provider itself, offering a bulletin board with Internet links called NANDO.

Subscribers receive, in addition to their Internet hookup, access to back issues of the newspaper, an on-line encyclopedia, and a battery of other features.
The combination of proprietary local services and access to the worldwide Internet is one that has seized the imagination of more than a few newspaper editors.
Look for similar services to appear from other papers, as well as broadcast media, in the near future.

MAKING MAIL COME ALIVE 

Electronic mail on the Internet must follow certain format requirements, as outlined in RFC 822.
The basic prerequisite is for the message header and body to consist only of 7-bit ASCII characters, which is why, when we want to send a program or a graphics file by e-mail, we have to encode and decode it, moving to and from basic ASCII.
As we saw in Chapter 8, a program thus encoded can be examined in this ASCII format, though it will seem to be no more than a string of meaningless characters.
The uudecode program is then applied to pop the ASCII alphabet soup back into the format we were expecting-a working program.

In keeping with the idea that sound and video are going to become increasingly important on the Internet, it's no surprise to find a new standard developing for attaching such enclosures within e-mail messages.
The standard is called MIME-it stands for Multi-purpose Internet Mail Extensions, and it allows for the creation of multimedia mail incorporating sound and video.
RFC 1341, "MIME: Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message Bodies," by N. Borenstein and N. Freed, presents the specifications that make this possible.

The idea behind MIME is that the sound and/or video materials attached to a given message are not actually sent until the recipient asks for them.
The message, then, is a file that locates the appropriate binary materials for transmission as it needs them.

Dial-up users, unfortunately, can't enjoy the fruits of this emerging technology.
Not yet, anyway.
However, the MIME specification is flexible enough to present the message contents as a plain message (with notation of materials that could not be displayed), so you would at least know you were in the presence of MIME.
A SLIP or other full network connection would allow you to proceed with the nontextual materials in such a message if you w ere using a MIME-compliant mail reader.
You would be prompted on whether you wished to continue with FTP file retrieval of the audio or video materials.

INTERNET TALK RADIO 

If a "message" can contain nested audio and video submaterials, we are beginning to redefine what we mean by the term.
A similar refocusing is changing our understanding of the term "publication."
Traditionally, of course, publishing meant using a printing press to produce what we computer types call hard copy.
Electronic publishing changed the rules by making journals and other textual information available on demand through computer networking.

Now MIME and an exciting technology known as multicasting are bringing the potential for sight and sound to the average workstation.
It was inevitable then, that a consumer-oriented medium would develop, utilizing audio over the network; it stretches our definition of the term "radio".
Internet Talk Radio (ITR) is that service, an information provider in radio magazine format, sort of an "All Things Considered" for Internet consumption.

The brain child of author and Internet world traveler Carl Malamud, Internet Talk Radio is distributed on the network itself as a massive audio file-between 15 and 20 MB total-professionally produced and transported worldwide.
The talk is technical, though Malamud aims to work on topics you won't find in the standard trade press.
This is an insider's view of the Internet, including such features as "Geek of the Week," in which prominent network figures are interviewed.
Although saved in a Sun Microsystems audio format, the show can be translated by utility programs for playback on a Macintosh or a PC.

What else might you find on Internet Talk Radio?
Malamud speaks of travel information and restaurant reviews as one possibility, with additional features on mailing lists and books, as well as coverage of key industry functions.
Internet Talk Radio could develop into a useful and diverting information forum if its current plans to summarize technical topics go through.
Beyond that, ITR offers the promise of a new medium, one that borrows the best of its chosen metaphor- radio-and brings to it the flexibility of computer processing and distribution.
As the first attempt to bring regular organized news and information by means of audio into the computer information flow, Malamud's new effort will be something to track carefully.

More information on audio formats is available through anonymous FTP.
The following file can help: xxx .

Unfortunately, the size of the Internet Talk Radio files makes them impractical for dial-up users; one show would exceed most people's storage allotment.
But the operative principle, that the Internet can carry sound as readily as text, is demonstrated by the project.

The key issue is size, which raises a question unlikely to be resolved any time soon: Is the movement of massive audio files over the network a brainstorm or simply a colossal waste of bandwidth considering that a text file of the half-hour show's proceedings could convey the same information in a package that seems, by comparison, minute?
If you're intrigued by such issues, you may want to listen in to the discussion on alt.internet.talk- radio , a USENET newsgroup that has sprung up around the new offering.

Older Internet Talk Radio shows have also been archived at various sites.
If you'd like to examine the archives, use FTP to sunsite.unc.edu .
The directory is pub/talk-radio .

IP MULTICASTING THE INTERNET BY SIGHT AND SOUND 

Attendees at the Internet Engineering Task Force's meeting in Boston in July 1992 weren't the only ones who could follow the proceedings.

Ninety-five workstations in ten countries, from Australia to Canada to Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, received live audio from the site, using built-in audio hardware and special software; an additional seventy-five workstations received slow-frame-rate video, which was displayed after decompression at each machine.
IETF's November 1992 meeting in Washington, DC, saw a similar demonstration of the Internet's ability to move real-time audio and video to a geographically dispersed audience.

While it may raise eyebrows at first, the idea of transporting such signals over a network makes sense.
If you can digitize a message or a still image, you can also digitize a voice or a video clip of someone delivering a speech.
And while the participants in these IETF experiments share a common enthusiasm, they also agree that a significant number of resource management issues must be addressed before real-time Internet audio and video will become commonplace.

Not all routers carrying Internet traffic, for example, can support audio and video multicasting, making it necessary for Steve Casner and Steve Deering-the Internet's audio/ video team-to construct what Casner called "a virtual multicast network of tunnels layered on top of the physical backbone and regional networks".
Multicasting, then, has given rise to a new backbone-the MBONE, for Multicast Backbone- which will serve as a testbed for continued audio and video experimentation.

Because of the high bandwidth demands of these projects, the MBONE functions almost like an old-fashioned telephone tree.9 Multicast technology configures network routers so they know about the special communications channels for this traffic.
When someone on that communications channel sends a packet to a multicast address, the routers that are part of the multicast "tree" copy the packets to the appropriate routers further down the tree, or to the ultimate hosts as the case may be.
Traffic is delivered only as necessary.

Why the term "multicast"?
A broadcast is sent out to everyone; a unicast goes from one point to another.
A multicast, by logical extension, is the movement of information from point to multipoint, traveling only to specified destinations on the Internet.
Video thus far is slow, some two to six frames per second.
"It's a bit like watching a movie from 1910," comments Vinton Cerf.
"But that's partly a function of available bandwidth.
There's a lot of compression going to get this to work".

What's ahead for the Internet as the multicast idea begins to solidify?
One obvious development, according to Cerf, is the likelihood of services charging fees depending on the type and quantity of their traffic.
It's one thing to route text data in ASCII files across the Internet.
But what happens when particular sites need to consume vastly higher amounts of bandwidth as part of their activities?
Distinctions between the kind of data moved and the cost of moving it are bound to become sharper in coming years.

Right now you need a sophisticated workstation to receive these transmissions-Casner and company have been working with Sun SPARCstations and Silicon Graphics Indigo machines, and it's clear that these cutting edge technologies will remain experimental for some time to come.
But if you're intrigued by the possibility of audio and video over a networked computer, you may want to read the technical details in a document Steve Casner has developed.
It's available by anonymous FTP.

THE EVOLUTION OF THE NREN 

As new technologies enter adolescence and commercial activity increases, the Internet faces a bevy of issues.
The complicated relationship between NSFNET and ANS has always been a locus of controversy.
According to Bill Washburn, executive director of the Commercial Internet Exchange Association, subsidies to ANS will eventually be eliminated as the NSF moves out of the position of funding the backbone.
This could allow NSF to provide money to different regional networks in order to choose their own best route onto the Internet.
A variety of other strategies are likewise possible.
Untangling government-sponsored growth from commercial applications has never been easy, and the jockeying for position as we move toward a National Information Infrastructure makes this point forcefully.

In early 1994, ANS CO+RE Systems announced that it was becoming a member of the Commercial Internet Exchange, and that it would carry traffic between CIX sites at its own expense.
The move clearly reflects the belief that CIX will become an umbrella organization supporting commercial Internet providers, and as such, it represents another milestone in the commercialization of the Internet.
It should be remembered that ANSnet remains, as of early 1994, the world's only public T3 backbone network running TCP/IP.

Ponder the implications both for the academic community and the broader commercial base as well.
Changes in subsidies for university networks would place the burden upon the regional providers and the schools they maintain to find ways to pay for their own operations, distributing the costs as broadly as possible.
The National Science Foundation, meanwhile, will put its money into a substantially reduced backbone network connecting supercomputer and other high-technology research sites.
Toward this end, NSF is planning a network that will pump data at 155 megabits per second, a backbone that will no longer play a significant role in providing basic connectivity for institutions.
The days of NSFNET as a backbone network connecting regional networks are ending.

Also ending, we may hope, is a classic misunderstanding about the nature of the Internet.
Academic users, accustomed to a network that sent them no monthly bills, tend to assume that network access is free; indeed, postings on USENET often reflect this assumption.
We know now that the Internet is free in the same way that interstate highways are free; i.e., they, like the network, have grown up in an environment that nurtures them with the taxpayer's dollar.
Moving into the commercial arena means we come closer to linking network usage with the cost of providing the service.
What seems to some as crass commercialism is, then, only the obvious working of a market economy.

We must also raise a related issue.
Is the future of the Internet inevitably tied to corporation-funded research, producing high-speed testbeds for new technology and, in the process, improving the corporations' competitive position?
If so, how is a balance to be struck between business interests and the public welfare?
These issues continue to be debated as the National Information Infrastructure, of which the NREN is to be only a part, takes shape in the minds of its proponents.

Raising the Speed Limit on the Data Highway 

The vision the NREN encompasses is one of power and utility.

Actively promoted by Vice-President AL Gore, this network is to be a high-speed data communications medium linking not just universities, research centers, and government agencies, but secondary and even elementary schools to information resources.
In the 1980s, Gore, then a senator, was instrumental in lobbying for the fiberoptic links that would become the NSFNET backbone.
It was in November 1987 that the Federal Coordinating Committee for Science Engineering and Technology proposed the NREN in a report to Congress.
The idea seemed simple: We already had a collection of computer networks, mostly academic and research-oriented, that moved data across a backbone of connections at some fifty-six thousand bits per second.

The NREN proposal was to increase that speed up to as much as a billion bits per second by the mid 1990s.
Once built, the network would be commercialized, allowing the federal government to turn over operations to private companies.

This should be a fast network indeed.
One billion bits per second, or one gigabit, is a speed that would allow you to send three-hundred copies of Moby Dick over the network every second.
No wonder the NREN's most fervent backers, including the Vice-President, see the visionary network as a national data highway, and liken it to the interstate highway system in terms of its effect upon economic growth for all regions of the country.
It was Gore who was responsible for getting the idea through Congress in the form of the High-Performance Computing and Communications Act of 1991, which provided 2.9 billion dollars over five y ears toward the NREN.
The High Performance Computing and High Speed Networking Applications Act of l 993, sponsored by Rep.
Richard Boucher (D.-W.Va), expands the Gore bill to include access to health-care facilities and schools at all levels.

Why NREN?
Gore sees it as vital to maintaining our technological superiority in a world where competition in high-tech can only grow stronger.
And while a large number of academic and research organizations around the United States are presently connected to the Internet, there are still gaps.
Although major universities invariably have access, an Internet account is a luxury for students and faculty at many smaller colleges, and generally out of the question for high-school and grade-school teachers and students.
An information super-highway is all about access, about bringing these resources to the researchers and educators who need them.
The NREN would attempt to connect all academic and research organizations as well as all government agencies.
In that sense, the NREN is seen as the logical development of the present-day NSFNET and indeed, NSFNET is now officially known as the Interim NREN, the base upon which tomorrow's network will be built.

A Vision of a New Network 

The NREN concept revolves around a series of computer capabilities, augmented by connections to powerful hardware resources like supercomputers.
These features, all of them available in some form today, could be enhanced and distributed throughout society, reaching from laboratories and universities to two- and four-year colleges.
They include electronic mail, high-resolution graphics, full-motion video, and sound.
They include computer libraries which could be tapped to provide information on almost any subject.
"By the end of the decade," writes Gordon Cook, "the NREN may become, on a national level, the most powerful tool ever created for finding, manipulating and disseminating information."
Cook edits the COOK Report on Internet - NREN , a regular newsletter on network development, and he is deeply concerned about how decisions made today will affect the future course of the project.

What could you do with such a network?
As opposed to the exchange of electronic mail, the NREN offers the possibility of interactive audio and video.
Imagine researchers separated by geography using their computer screens to work on intricate specifications in real-time, making dynamic changes to plans and working out new strategies based on visual data at each workstation.
Such a network would also handle video telephone connections, so that each researcher could talk to his or her opposite number on-screen, and see that person responding (whether this is a genuine advantage is a matter for speculation).

Not just drawings could be examined in this way, of course, but also medical imagery including patient records and X-rays, which could be analyzed by specialists no matter what their physical location.
Now extend the idea into the realms of art, of literature, of entertainment.
If video and voice can flow over the network, so can music, or plays, or poetry readings.
Pipe such traffic into the home through fiber-optic links and you complete a transition, taking the Internet from a specialist's tool to the primary communications medium for a computerized society.

Powerful support has arisen in the networking community for applications like these.
Putting NREN capabilities into primary and secondary schools could bring a wealth of library tools to students; corporations could readily tap available databases.
The grandest vision incorporates a truly national network which would include community access at all levels of society.
Indeed, the enthusiastic response to the NREN concept in the library and K-12 education communities bodes well for the development of multimedia and remote learning, using network tools that will take advantage of the NREN's broad bandwidth.
Such tools might include knowledge robots-knowbots, which would be sent through the network to obtain specific information for their users, as well as electronic directories with the addresses of users and services, along with user interfaces that don't restrict access to the technologically sophisticated.

It's a staggering vision-students routinely logging on to the Library of Congress, laboratory researchers exchanging high-resolution imagery in pursuit of medical breakthroughs-but there remain serious questions about how such a network is to be organized.
We've seen that the present-day Internet, despite its explosive growth in recent months, remains difficult to use and, for a broad spectrum of non-networked individual users, challenging to access.
Tapping it requires relatively arcane knowledge of commands and procedures which most network operations centers are unable to explain to the novice.
Documentation is both sparse and technically intimidating, which is why books like this are necessary.
The ever-changing dynamics of network tools ensures there will be no early end to such needs.

A Question of Access 

The inevitable question, then, is who will use the NREN?
Raising the Internet's speed limit into the gigabit range is unquestionably important, but prudent policy also dictates we address some of the network's shortcomings, or the NREN will emerge as the tool of a technological elite, effectively off-limits save for those savvy enough to capitalize on it.
What we need, say some observers, more than network speed, is attention to user interface issues.
Why build a network if the majority of potential users can't figure out how to use it?
Why build it, for that matter, if access is in the hands of an entrenched elite whose self-interest dictates restricting it to like-minded specialists? 

Tom Grundner, director of the National Public Telecomputing Network in Cleveland, recalls reading a string of messages about the NREN from academics worried about the general public gaining access, one of which concluded, "Why should we let them use it at all?" 
It's not an attitude Grundner finds amusing.
"Academic computing centers are designed to provide services to the people who work there and 35 of their buddies," Grundner said.
"They don't care if anybody else on campus ever has access to this stuff, much less whether the public at large does.
The worst nightmare of the academic computing people would be to have the Internet opened up to anyone who wanted to have access to it"13.
All of which raises the ire of this electronic populist-Grundner notes that it's usually public tax dollars that make academic computing centers possible.

As for the NREN in its current state of development, Grundner opposes it, saying it lacks a coherent vision for the development of community computer systems.
Instead, his energies are applied to the development of Free-Nets, those computer networks, examined in Chapter 3, that link the public to Internet resources while offering abundant community information and a user-friendly interface.

Grundner is trying to put networking within reach of anyone with a modem.
It will do us little good, he thinks, to train students to use a network if, as soon as they graduate, their access to its resources is cut off.

For his part, Gordon Cook continues to be a provocative gadfly, holding NREN planners' feet to the fire to explain their actions.
In an incisive study called "The National Research and Education Network: Whom Shall It Serve?", Cook argues that the NREN project has suffered from a lack of direction and focus.
While the High Performance Computing and Communications legislation called for the network to be privatized after five years, the National Science Foundation's ongoing improvements to the network backbone have already brought private corporations into play, well ahead of the intent expressed in the legislation.

Who's Going to Build It? 

An equally critical consideration is, who is going to build the data superhighway?
Is the NREN to be, like the interstate highway system, a structure built by the government but otherwise unregulated?
Or is it to follow the model of the national power grid, and be a privately constructed network submitting to federal and state regulation so that affordable access is guaranteed?
Already the two camps are taking the field, with Vice-President Core arguing that the private sector may not be willing to take on such a risky investment, and that if it did, the danger of the NREN's becoming restricted in its access is too great.

Gore argues for a government-constructed public network regulated and managed for all Americans to use.

Building the NREN is no small undertaking.
Moving data networks like this one into the home requires replacing the copper telephone wires that currently feed most homes with high-capacity fiber-optic cables.
While most long-distance lines have already undergone such conversion, the so-called "local loop" between the home and the local telephone switch remains largely copper-based, and thus of insufficient bandwidth to carry the huge dataflow proposed by the NREN.
Telephone equipment at both the long-distance and local levels would need upgrading as well to handle the required bandwidth and stand up to the anticipated traffic flow.
Critical to the discussion is the meeting ground between private investment and universal access, a murky terrain whose cartography is under active investigation.

While some computer companies look forward to the possibility of increased equipment sales because of the NREN, other firms are concerned about the federal government's role in developing the network.
AT'&'T is but one company uneasy about the potential of the government creating a network that would operate in competition with the established telecommunications carriers.
And at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Lotus Development Corporation founder Mitchell D. Kapor thinks the whole enterprise offers too grandiose a vision.

Kapor insists that Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) technology, capable of being carried over standard copper wires, offers the best hope of making many of these services available to the widest possible audience.
The ISDN choice would also offer significant cost savings over the full NREN proposal.

Whatever the merits of ISDN, the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) is an organization worth your attention.
Founded in 1990, EFF advocates freedom of expression in digital media and the application of constitutional principles to computer communications.
While the EFF is perhaps best known for its role in the successful lawsuit of software game publisher Steve Jackson against the U.S. Secret Service, the organization is also active in shaping debate over such issues as the emerging National Research and Education Network, privacy in computer communications, and the emergence of on-line "virtual" communities.

To learn more about the EFF, contact: xxx .
