
ENCAPSULATED CELLS AS THERAPY

An emerging approach to treating disease combines living cells with plastic membranes that shield the cells from immune attack.

In 1994 a man suffering from relentless pain became one of the first volunteers to test an entirely new approach to treating human disorders.
As he lay still, a surgeon threaded a small plastic tube into his spinal column.
The sealed tube, five centimeters long and as thin as the wire in a standard paper clip, contained calf cells able to secrete a cocktail of painkillers.

If all went well, the secretions would seep out of the tube through minute pores and then diffuse into the spinal cord. 
Meanwhile, nutrients and oxygen from the surrounding cerebrospinal fluid would slip into the capsule to sustain the cells.
At the same time, the tubing would bar entry by large substances.
Specifically, it would prevent cells and antibody molecules of the immune system (both of which are relatively big) from contacting the bovine cells and destroying them as foreign invaders.

The ultimate aim of this particular procedure is to relieve discomfort, by interrupting the flow of pain signals through the spinal cord to detection centers in the brain.
The 1994 study, however, was preliminary.
It was designed to see whether the implanted cells could survive and release their analgesics for months.
They did.
Similar success in several patients later justified a major trial, now under way, to assess pain control directly.

But the results also had broader implications.
They fueled growing optimism, based on extensive animal experiments, that combining living cells with protective synthetic membranes could help correct a range of human disorders.

Five years later excitement over that strategy--variously known as encapsulated-cell, immunoisolation or biohybrid therapy--seems entirely justified.
Like the pain implant, a biohybrid liversupport system has progressed to a controlled human trial involving scores of patients and multiple centers.
And immunoisolation therapies for various other conditions are being evaluated in smaller human tests or in studies of large animals. 
Among those conditions are devastating neurodegenerative disorders (such as Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases), hemophilia, anemia and growth retardation.
Treatment of macular degeneration, a common cause of blindness, and other eye diseases are starting to be assessed as well, in rodents.

Most proposed applications involve implanting encapsulated cells in a selected site in the body.
Some, though, such as the liver treatment, would incorporate cells and membranes into a bedside device resembling a kidney dialysis machine.

Immunoisolation therapy appeals to us and other researchers because it overcomes important disadvantages of implanting free cells.
Like free cells, those encased in membranes can potentially replace critical functions of ones that have been damaged or lost.
They can also supply such "extras" as painkillers.
They can even provide gene therapy, secreting proteins encoded by genes that molecular biologists have introduced into cells.

Free cells, however, are likely to be ambushed by the immune system unless they come from the recipients themselves or their twins.
For that reason, patients usually require immune-suppressing drugs.
By mechanically blocking immune attacks, plastic membranes around grafted cells should obviate the need for such medicines, which can predispose people to infection, certain cancers (lymphomas) and kidney failure.

The immune protection afforded by plastic membranes should also allow cells derived from animals to be transplanted into people.
Unencapsulated animal cells are not a viable option, because existing immune-suppressing drugs do not fully protect against the rejection of cross-species implants (xenografts). 
Use of animal cells would help compensate for the well-known shortage of human donor tissue.
Finally, cells implanted within a plastic casing can be retrieved readily if need be. 
Free cells, in contrast, often cannot be recovered.

An Inspired Proposal

Current efforts to encapsulate cells for therapy owe a great debt to ideas put forward by William L. Chick in the mid-1970s, when he was at the Joslin Research Laboratory in Boston.
Like legions of scientists then and now, he had his sights set on curing insulin-dependent (type I) diabetes, which usually strikes youngsters.
This disorder arises when the pancreas stops making insulin, a hormone it normally releases in amounts tuned to control the concentrations of glucose (a sugar) in the blood.
Daily insulin injections save lives, but they do not mimic the natural pattern of insulin release from the pancreas. 
In consequence, tissues may at times become exposed to too much glucose.
Over years, this excess can lead to such diabetic complications as blindness and kidney failure. 

Chick thought implantation of encapsulated pancreatic islets--the clusters of cells that contain the insulin-secreting components--might restore the proper pattern of insulin release without requiring the administration of immunosuppressants.
Use of islets from pigs (then the main source of injected insulin) would, moreover, guarantee a rich pipeline of cells.

Studies in rodents in the mid-1970s and thereafter suggested his logic was sound.
Unfortunately, certain technical obstacles have so far kept immunoisolation therapy from fulfilling its promise in diabetes.
Chick died last year, without seeing his vision fulfilled.
His pioneering ideas have, nonetheless, sparked impressive progress on other fronts, including device design.

Creative Configurations

Encapsulation systems now come in a multitude of configurations. 
All, however, include the same basic ingredients:
cells (typically ones able to secrete useful products), a matrix that cushions the cells and otherwise supports their survival and function, and a somewhat porous membrane.
Biomedical engineers now know that cells in an implant will work poorly or die if they are farther than 500 microns (millionths of a meter) from blood vessels or other sources of nourishment--a distance roughly equivalent to the diameter of the graphite in a mechanical pencil.

Vascular, or flow-through, designs were the first to be tested (for correcting diabetes in rodents).
These devices divert a patient's circulating blood into a plastic tube and then back to the circulatory system.
Secretory cells are placed in a closed chamber that surrounds a slightly porous segment of the tubing, the way a doughnut surrounds its hole.
As blood flows through this part of the circuit, it can absorb substances secreted by the therapeutic cells and can provide oxygen and nutrients to the cells.
If islets are in the chamber, they will match the insulin released to the concentration of glucose in the blood.
For other applications, cells that emit a product at a constant rate can be chosen.

Flow-through devices can be produced in implantable forms. 
But they will probably find most application in bedside equipment, because implants require invasive, vascular surgery and longterm administration of blood thinners (to prevent blood clots from forming in the tubing).
In addition, if an implanted tube breaks, internal bleeding will result.

Searching for a less invasive method, researchers introduced "microencapsulation" in the late 1970s.
To make microcapsules, workers put a single pancreatic islet or a few thousand individual cells into a drop of aqueous solution containing slightly charged polymers.
Then they bathe the drop in a solution of oppositely charged polymers.
The polymers react to form a coating around a cell-and-fluid-filled droplet measuring about 500 microns in diameter.

Microcapsules are easy to produce and thus are valuable for quick experiments but have notable drawbacks for human therapy. 
They are quite fragile.
Once placed, they may be difficult to find and remove--a distinct problem if they have unwanted effects.
What is more, the volume needed to correct a disorder may be too great to fit conveniently in a desired implant site.

The most practical format for human therapy appears to be preformed macrocapsules, initially empty units that are loaded with a matrix and all the cells needed for treatment.
Some macrocapsules are disks about the size of a dime or a quarter. 
Others are roughly the size and shape of the stay in a shirt collar.
Usually, however, macrocapsules intended for humans take the form of a sealed tube, or capillary, that is several centimeters long and between 500 and 1,000microns in diameter.

Macrocapsules are far more durable and rugged than microcapsule droplets, contain internal reinforcements, can be tested for seal integrity before implantation and can be designed to be refillable in the body.
They can also be retrieved simply. 
Their main limitation is the number of cells they can accommodate: up to about five million for a tube and up to 50 or 100 million for a disk or fiat sheet.
Those figures are adequate for many applications, but not all.
Enlarging the capsules can render them prone to bending, which promotes breakage.
In addition, the edges of bent regions encourage fibrosis, an ingrowth of local tissue.
Fibrosis can choke off transport to and from encapsulated cells.

Fabricators of shunts, microcapsules and macrocapsules aim for a membrane pore size that will allow diffusion of molecules measuring up to 50,000 daltons, or units of molecular weight. 
Holes that size generally are small enough to block invasion by immune cells and most immune molecules but are large enough to allow the inflow of nutrients and oxygen and the outflow of proteins secreted by implanted cells.
Actual membranes end up containing a range of pore sizes, however, and so some large immune system molecules will inevitably pass through the membranes into an implant.
Fortunately, this phenomenon does not undermine most implants.

New Focus on Designer Cells

Until the late 1980s, most biohybrid devices relied on primary cells: those taken directly from donor tissue.
Primary cells are convenient for small studies in small animals, but obtaining the large quantities needed for big animals (including humans) or for numerous recipients can be problematic.
And because every donor has its own history, guaranteeing the safety of primary cells can be a formidable undertaking.
In the early 1990s, therefore, some teams began turning to cell lines.

These lines consist of immortal, or endlessly dividing, cells that multiply readily in culture without losing their ability to perform specialized functions, such as secreting helpful substances. 
Many primary cells replicate poorly in culture or have other disadvantages.
Hence, to make a cell line, investigators often have to alter the original versions.
Once established, though, cell lines can provide an ongoing supply of uniform cells for transplantation.

The potential utility of cell lines for encapsulation therapy became abundantly clear in animal tests that we and our colleagues performed starting in 1991.
The well-established PC-12 line, derived from a rodent adrenal tumor (a pheochromocytoma), was known to secrete high levels of dopamine, a signaling molecule depleted in the brains of patients with Parkinson's disease. 
To see whether implants containing these cells might be worth studying as a therapy for Parkinson's, we put small robes of the cells into the brain of diverse animals whose dopamine-producing cells had been chemically damaged to produce Parkinson-like symptoms. 
In many subjects, including nonhuman primates, the procedure dramatically reversed the symptoms.

Significantly, the cells did not proliferate uncontrollably and puncture the capsules.
They replaced cells that had died but did not allow the population to exceed the carrying capacity of the implant.
The studies also eased fears that if immortalized cells escaped, they would inevitably spawn cancerous tumors.
Immortalization is one step on a cell's road to cancer.
To be truly malignant, though, cells must acquire the ability to invade neighboring tissue, grow their own blood supply and spread to distant sites.
Tumor formation is a potential concern in same-species transplants of immortalized cells, but cross-species transplants turn out to be less worrisome: unencapsulated rat PC-12 cells in primate brains did not generate tumors.
In fact, they did not even survive; the recipients' immune system destroyed them quickly.

The PC-12 work was never followed up in Parkinson's patients, perhaps because other promising treatments took precedence.
Still, the studies did demonstrate the feasibility of deploying cell lines in immunoisolation therapies.

Success with cell lines also opened the door to use of genetically modified cells, because dividing cells are most amenable to taking up introduced genes and producing the encoded proteins. 
In other words, immunoisolation technology suddenly offered a new way to provide gene therapy.
Molecular biologists would insert genes for medically useful proteins into cell lines able to manufacture the proteins, and the cells would then be incorporated into plastic-covered implants.
Gene therapy protocols frequently remove cells from patients, insert selected genes, allow the altered cells to multiply and then return the resulting collection to the body in the hope that the encoded proteins will be made in the needed quantities.
The output of capsules filled with genetically altered cells, in contrast, can be measured before the implants are delivered to patients.
Later, the capsules can be removed easily if need be.

An unresolved issue is whether cell lines enlisted for encapsulation therapies should be derived from animals or humans. 
Primary cells, taken directly from donors, almost certainly need to come from animals, because human donor tissue is in such short supply.
Some researchers prefer animal-derived lines because renegade cells that broke free from an implant, being highly foreign to the recipient, would meet the promptest immune destruction.
To provide human therapeutic proteins to a recipient, cell designers could readily equip the animal cells with human genes for those proteins.
Other workers favor human-derived lines, in part because human cells tend to fare better within capsules.
They also skirt the risk that animal pathogens will be transferred to humans.
For extra safety, human cells could be engineered to elicit swift immune recognition should they escape.

Readers may notice that encapsulated cells, genetically altered or not, often essentially serve as delivery vehicles for therapeutic proteins.
Yet proteins can be delivered by injection.
Why, then, would cell implantation be needed at all?

Encapsulated-cell therapy can be very helpful when injections cannot provide enough of a protein where it is needed most, such as in a tumor or behind the blood-brain barrier--a natural filter that blocks many blood-borne substances from reaching cells of the brain and spinal cord.
Encapsulated cells would likewise be valuable when a therapeutic protein is too unstable to be formulated as a drug or when reproducing a natural pattern of protein delivery is important (as with diabetes).

Human Studies

Genetically manipulated cell lines are likely to predominate in biohybrid devices of the future.
Yet applications involving primary cells, having been studied the longest, have progressed to the most definitive clinical tests.
One example, developed by the two of us and a large contingent of associates, is the treatment for chronic pain described at the start of this article. 
We obtain the cells for the pain implant from the adrenal glands of calves raised under highly controlled conditions.
Certain adrenal components--the chromaffin cells--naturally release a suite of analgesics.
After carefully purifying about three million of these cells, we fit them into a hollow fiber that is sealed at both ends, linked to a tether (for retrieval) and implanted, through a minimally invasive procedure, into the spinal column.

When our surgical collaborators showed in the mid-1990s that such implants could function for months in patients, they noted possible signs of pain control.
Several patients reported significant reductions in discomfort and in morphine use.
But these experiments did not include a comparison group receiving a placebo (say, an empty capsule), so we could not be sure whether our treatment was truly responsible.
The large clinical trial now in progress involves more than 100 patients and is designed specifically to address the extent of pain relief.
It is headed by Moses B. Goddard of Cyto Therapeutics in Lincoln, R.I. Regardless of the outcome, the data already in hand demonstrate that immunoisolated cells of animal origin can live for months in the central nervous system of subjects who are taking no immune-suppressing drugs.
In contrast, no organ transplanted from animals to humans has survived without encapsulation even when supported by the aggressive delivery of immunosuppressants.

A second well-developed application of immunoisolation therapy --the liver-assist device--also relies on cells harvested directly from animals.
Within a healthy liver, cells known as hepatocyres take up toxins and break them into innocuous forms. 
When the liver fails, such toxins can accumulate to lethal levels.
Liver transplants can save patients, but many die waiting for a donor organ matched to their tissue type.
The biohybrid liver systems under study aim to keep patients alive until a donor is found.

This "bridge to transplant" therapy employs a bedside, vascular apparatus.
In essence, blood from the patient is pumped to a closed chamber in which a semiporous segment of the blood-carrying tube is surrounded by a suspension of pig hepatocytes.
The hepatocytes take up the toxins from the flowing blood and degrade them, so that healthier blood returns to the body as it completes its circuit [see box on page 78]. 
In contrast to the pain implant, which delivers a few milligrams of cells and is expected to function continuously for months or years, a liver device can accommodate between 20 and 200 grams of purified hepatocytes (about the weight of the meat in a Big Mac) and would be needed for just six to 24 hours at a time.

In an initial study involving close to 40 patients with terminal liver failure, the equipment tested functioned exactly as hoped.
That finding, reported in 1998, paved the way for a large, controlled trial now starting in the U.S. and Europe. 
Expectations of success are high, and researchers have reason to believe that under special circumstances, such as acute liver failure caused by excessive intake of acetaminophen, the liver might regenerate and that no transplantation would be required. 
Yet optimism has to be tempered by past experience.
The path to liver-support systems is littered with interventions that worked beautifully in initial tests but faded in large trials. 

For both the pain and liver applications, scientists must address concerns that genes from unknown animal viruses might be hiding in the harvested cells and that those genes might give rise to viruses and to dangerous infections in transplant recipients. (Rigorous screening methods ensure that no already known pathogen is transferred.) Fortunately, plastic membranes should provide a formidable barrier to the transmission of animal viruses, and to date, no patient has acquired even a benign infection from donor cells.
Even so, investigators are neither cavalier nor complacent about the issue and continue to attend to it closely.
Although less advanced, human trials of gene therapy applications have begun as well.
Two small studies target disorders of the central nervous system.
The first clinical trial of genetically altered encapsulated cells took aim at amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the neurodegenerative condition marked by decay of spinal nerves that control the 1996 six patients received implants containing a cell line--derived from baby hamster kidney cells-that had been given the gene for a protein called ciliary-derived neurotrophic factor (CNTF).
This gene was chosen because other studies in animals and people had suggested the factor might retard the deterioration of neurons that usually die in ALS patients.
The protocol was much like that used for chronic pain:
a small tube filled with cells was implanted in the spinal column.

The study examined whether the cells survived and released potentially therapeutic amounts of CNTF throughout the three-month experiment.
The cells functioned well.
The treatment did not appear to retard disease progression, however, although the test had too few subjects and was too short to be particularly informative on that score.
Nevertheless, this trial suggested that if the right gene or mix of genes for treating ALS were found, encapsulated cells would serve as a good means of delivering them to the central nervous system.

Implants containing the same cell line are now being evaluated in patients with Huntington's disease, which progressively kills certain brain cells.
This time, however, the capsules have been placed into fluid-filled spaces in the brain called ventricles.
This gene therapy protocol is being conducted in Paris and has just started.
A number of animal experiments evaluating immunoisolation for the delivery of gene therapy have begun as well.
Several are listed in the table on the next page.

The Special Challenge of Diabetes

If immunoisolation research is progressing well in many areas, why has no one managed, after more than 20 years of trying, to perfect an islet-cell encapsulation procedure to correct diabetes? 

After 1977, when Chick and his colleagues reversed diabetes in rodents, at least a dozen laboratories around the world replicated that feat, with a wide range of implant designs in various rodent models of diabetes.
But immunoisolation therapy based on islets has not fared well in larger species, such as dogs, monkeys and humans.
The most positive results come from single cases.
Moreover, on close examination, many of those reported successes have been achieved only with the help of immunosuppressants or some amount of injected insulin.

Much of the difficulty stems from the sheer number of islets required by large animals and humans: 700,000 or so, sheltering approximately two billion insulin-producing, "beta" cells.
That amount is nearly 1,000 times greater than the cell volume encapsulated successfully in clinical implants to date.
Diabetes in mice can be reversed with only about 500 islets, which technicians generally extract from donor pancreases by hand.
But hand-picking 700,000 islets is out of the question, and semiautomated techniques have not been able to isolate the required quantities of healthy islets consistently.
Further, in the native pancreas, each islet enjoys its own blood supply. 
Islets suffer in the spartan environment within implanted capsules.
For these reasons and others, we agree with those who have concluded that an implanted semiartificial pancreas based on encapsulated islets is most likely to remain an unfulfilled goal for the foreseeable future.

A new proposal, though, just might break the impasse.
Employing a variety of approaches, at least three groups are developing cell lines that release insulin in response to the same complex signals that trigger insulin secretion from the healthy pancreas.
The plan is to create cells that produce more insulin than natural beta cells (so that fewer cells would be required) and that are equipped to survive in the nutrient-poor, oxygen-depleted environment of an implant.
Five years ago creation of such cells might have been regarded as impossible, but recent progress in cell and molecular biology has been overwhelming. 

We expect to see glucose-responsive, insulin-secreting cell lines tested in large animals five years from now, possibly much sooner.
And we are hopeful that those lines will progress rapidly to the clinic after that.
Some experts believe this prediction is too conservative; others counsel that the goal will take longer to achieve.
But everyone agrees that an artificial pancreas or a biohybrid version must continue to rank as a top priority for 21st-century medicine.
As that work continues, new applications for immunoisolation therapy should arise as well.
Indeed, we anticipate that over the next 20 years, encapsulated-cell therapy will emerge from its investigative stages to play a key role in treating some of the most refractory and debilitating diseases of humankind. 

A Promising Liver-Support Approach 

Not all encapsulation systems are implants.
Liver-support systems currently being studied operate outside the body.
They aim to sustain liver-failure patients until a compatible organ becomes available for transplantation.
The particular device shown at the right and illustrated below was developed by teams led by Claudy J. R Mullon of Circe Biomedical in Lexington, Mass., and Achilles A. Demetriou of Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.

This machine draws blood from a patient and pumps the fluid component (plasma) through a charcoal column (meant to remove some toxins) and an oxygen-replenishing unit before delivering it to a chamber containing healthy liver cells--hepatocytes--from pigs.
In the chamber (detail), the plasma courses through slightly porous tubes, which are surrounded by the hepatocytes. 
Toxins from the plasma diffuse into the cells, which are intended to convert the poisons into innocuous substances. 
After the purified plasma leaves the chamber, it recombines with blood cells and is returned to the patient.

Figure 1

Implant under study for relief of chronic pain is fitted into a fluid-filled canal in the spinal column

It consists of a narrow plastic tube (detail), several centimeters long, filled with calf cells that secrete natural painkillers.
Ideally, the painkillers will leak from the implant through tiny pores in the plastic, diffuse to nerve cells in the spinal cord and block pain signals from flowing to the brain.
The pores will also allow small nutrients and oxygen to enter the implant but will be too small to permit access by immune components that normally destroy foreign cells. 
The tether allows the implant to be removed.

Figure 2

Encapsulation systems vary in size and shape

Microcapsules are minute plastic bubbles containing cells and fluid.
Macrocapsules, centimeters in length, are precast before being loaded with cells and a supporting matrix. 
The "stem" on the top implant is a loading port that is removed before implantation.
The blue "tail" on the bottom device is part of its tether.
Larger, flow-through devices pass blood through a plastic tube, a segment of which is surrounded by a cell-filled chamber (ring).
The one shown is implantable.
Silhouettes at the right depict actual sizes.

Figure 3

A Promising Liver-Support Approach 

Figure 4

Enlarged, cutaway view of an empty tubular implant reveals the membrane's foamlike structure 

Figure 5

Fine tube harboring hamster cells was removed from the spinal column of a human subject after 17 weeks

At excision, the cells were still secreting a therapeutic protein, and the encapsulation device was free of surface damage.
The results support hopes that implants containing cells from nonhuman species can function for long periods.
