
CANCER CELL INVASION AND METASTASIS. 

The most life-threatening aspect of cancer is the undetected spread of tumor cells throughout the body.

Improved understanding of how these cells invade tissues is leading to new treatments

Suppose that during a routine mammography screening, a 55-year-old woman learns she has a suspicious lump in her breast. 
With a microscope and a sample of the tissue mass, a pathologist can readily diagnose whether the tissue is malignant. 

The fate of the patient is far more difficult to determine, however.
It depends on a cellular event that cannot be observed directly: metastasis, the spread of malignant cells throughout the body that induces secondary tumors.

When a cancer treatment fails, metastasis is the primary cause of death.
If a primary tumor is detected early and removed before metastasis occurs, the cancer will be eradicated. 
On the other hand, if even microscopic metastases, or secondary tumors, are already present at the time of diagnosis, then the prognosis is grave.
Left untreated, those metastases will grow and prove fatal.

Although the ominous nature of metastasis is well known, its sheer complexity as a process has historically impeded research progress.
Fortunately, tenacious analysis of the individual steps of metastasis has finally yielded a wealth of new information. 
One of the most important findings is that, contrary to some early assumptions, metastasis is an active process and not an accidental consequence of tumor growth.
Indeed, the invasion of healthy tissues by tumor cells-a critical step in the development of secondary tumors-is clearly a complex phenomenon that involves responses by both cancerous and normal cells.

Our laboratory at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) has been attempting to study the fundamental basis for cancer invasion and metastasis at two levels:
the biochemical machinery of invasion that operates at the cell surface and the genes inside the tumor cell that make metastasis possible.
Our combined approach involved direct observation of the behavior of individual tumor cells, extraction and purification of proteins produced by tumor cells, and isolation of genes expressed predominantly or exclusively in cells with either great or little metastatic activity.
We have identified a set of genes and proteins that appear to regulate aspects of invasion and metastasis.

Those discoveries are now guiding us toward treatment strategies that might arrest tumors before they metastasize.
Promising novel markers are being developed to predict the existence of small metastases that have not yet produced symptoms.
Both those outcomes will help cancer patients in the early stages of their illness.
A more pressing need, however, exists for techniques capable of eradicating secondary tumors that already exist.
Our understanding of biomolecular mechanisms in metastasis seems to be leading us toward that goal as well.

The term "metastasis" was coined by Joseph Claude Recamier, a French physician, in his 1829 treatise Recherches du Cancer .
He was the first to provide anatomic evidence that metastases are caused by cancer cells that enter the circulation and travel to distant sites in the body.
Before Recamier, surgeons and anatomists had recognized that tumors could extend the borders of their growth to colonize nearby tissues and lymph nodes, but they believed that colonies of tumors in more distant organs arose independently.
Recamier described local infiltration, invasion of veins by cancer tissue and secondary growths in the brains of patients with breast cancer.

Recamier's contributions to the biology of metastasis established his place in history, but they did not lead him to devise better therapies.
He espoused compression wrapping as a treatment for breast cancer-presumably to restrain the spread of the tumor. 
We now know that procedure would actually promote the discharge of cancer cells into the circulation.
Fortunately, treatment by compression never became popular.

More recent studies of metastasis have revealed it as an arduous, multistage marathon in which only a tiny percentage-fewer than one in 10,000- of the tumor cells that leave the primary tumor survive to start new tumor colonies.
The competition begins when tumor cells exit from the primary tumor by penetrating the walls of channels in the vascular and lymphatic circulatory systems.
Tumors induce their own supply of new blood vessels (a process called angiogenesis) to nourish the rapidly expanding mass.
Because newly formed blood vessels in tumors are leaky, malignant cells can cross their walls fairly easily.
Any branch of the vascular tree within a tumor mass is a potential site for the discharge of cells into the circulation.

Lymphatic vessels are also ports of entry for malignant cells, but tumors do not induce their own lymphatic network. 
Because lymphatic vessels normally drain away excess fluid between cells, the lack of lymphatics in tumors may contribute to the buildup of hydrostatic pressure within the tumor mass, as Pietro Gullino of the Institute of Anatomical Pathology in Turin first demonstrated.
This intemal pressure may actually hurt the tumor and help its host by shutting down weak vascular channels and depriving sections of the tumor mass of oxygen and nourishment.
The absence of internal tumor lymphatics also means that cancerous cells can enter the lymphatic system only at the interface between the tumor and the host.

Tumor cells are usually carried in the venous and lymphatic circulation until they lodge in the next "downstream" capillary bed or lymph node, either by obstructing a narrow vessel or by adhering to the vessel's inner lining.
In most cases, a metastasizing cell passes through the heart before it finds a resting place.
Purely on the basis of circulatory anatomy, one can predict where 60 percent of the metastases from a primary tumor will arise.
The lungs are a common site of metastasis for many cancers, for example, because the heart pumps all the blood through their capillaries before sending it elsewhere in the body.

Metastases from colon cancer often arise in the liver, because the liver receives the direct drainage of venous blood from the large intestine.

When metastases arise in organs other than those predicted, it is usually because the circulating tumor cells have found a special "soil" for survival and growth.
The favorable environment in those organs may include hormones or growth-promoting factors that selectively stimulate the tumor cells.

Concentration gradients of certain proteins emanating from organs may also attract tumor cells and induce them to migrate out of the bloodstream.

The vast majority of the tumor cells arrested in the capillaries or lymph nodes die, victims of mechanical turbulence in the circulation or attacks by host defenses.
Within eight to 24 hours, however, a few of the surviving tumor cells begin to invade the vessel wall and eventually leave the circulation.

Not all the tumor cells that enter an organ survive and grow.
Only those tumor cells that begin to proliferate will initiate a new colony.
Various influences can stimulate that proliferation, including local growth factors, hormones produced by the host and autostimulating growth factors produced by the tumor cells themselves.
A fledgling metastatic colony will expand only if tumor angiogenesis ensues to provide nourishment.
The fully formed secondary tumor will then have its own vascular supply and can become a new source for circulating tumor cells.
Thus, metastastic colonies can themselves metastasize and thereby accelerate a patient's deterioration. 

At several points in metastasis- during entry into the circulation, during escape from the circulation through the vascular wall and during penetration into normal surrounding tissues-tumor cells must manifest invasive properties.

Until the late 1970s, medical researchers debated whether cancer cell invasion was simply a byproduct of pressure within the tumor as it grew, coupled with the reduced tendency of tumor cells to stick together.
In this view of invasion as a passive process, tumor cells are pushed by the pressure of growth into the circulation, where they dissociate and disseminate. 
Yet that theory cannot explain how some benign tumors (such as leiomyomas of the uterus) grow to a large size and produce high internal pressure without invading the surrounding tissues or metastasizing.

Our metastasis group at NCI set out to test the growth-pressure hypothesis experimentally.
First, we treated metastatic tumor cells with an agent that blocked their ability to divide, and then we analyzed their ability to migrate and invade through tissue barriers.
Blocking growth had no effect on their performance.
We concluded that the pressure of a tumor's growth was not required to push the cancer cells through the barrier.
Tumor invasion is clearly an active process. 

Malignancy, the potential of a tumor to metastasize, requires invasion.
This property can be identified by a pathologist looking at a sample of the edge of the tumor.
A benign tumor, which has no invasive properties, has a sharply demarcated border caused by compression and displacement by the adjacent tissue.

In contrast, a malignant tumor has a poorly defined border, called the invasion front, where individual tumor cells actively migrate away from the primary mass.

The complicated biochemical events occurring at the invasion front involve contributions from both the tumor cells and the host.

Understanding the mechanism of invasion requires an appreciation of the physical barriers that stand between circulating tumor cells and normal extravascular tissues.
The first barrier is the layer of endothelial cells that line the interior of blood vessels and lymph vessels.
Experiments performed by Garth Nicolson of M. D. Anderson Hospital in Houston have demonstrated that tumor cells may possess special adhesive affinities for the endothelial surface.
The binding of tumor cells to the endothelial layer causes it to retract and expose the tissue beneath it.
In this manner, the tumor cell actually enlists normal endothelial cells to cooperate during the process of invasion. 

The barrier beneath the endothelial cells, the extracellular matrix, is more substantial and requires greater ingenuity to breach.
The matrix is a dense meshwork of diverse proteins and carbohydrate molecules.
In mammalian organisms, fences of extracellular matrix divide tissues into a series of compartments. 
One specialized form of the matrix is the basement membrane, which ensheathes the blood vessels, muscle cells and the nervous system.
Adjacent to the basement membrane is another type of matrix, called the interstitial stroma, which holds other tissue cells and lymphatic vessels.

The extracellular matrix acts in part as a scaffold for the growth of tissues.

It provides selective permeability for the transport of proteins and other molecules between cells, across blood vessel walls and during filtration by the kidney.
Moreover, the extracellular matrix also serves as a mechanical barrier to tumor cell invasion.

Normally, the cellular populations on either side of the extracellular matrix do not intermix, even during wound healing or organ development in the embryo.

Malignant cells, however, traverse the extracellular matrix readily, cross tissue boundaries and end up where they do not belong.
The disruption of basement membranes is a hallmark of the invasion front in all human cancers.
A "social order" definition of the metastatic tumor cell is its tendency to disrupt extracellular matrix boundaries and to intermix with cell types different from those found in the original tumor bed. 

The continuous basement membrane that surrounds blood vessels does not usually contain pores or channels large enough for tumor cells to traverse it passively.

Metastasizing tumor cells must therefore find another way to penetrate the basement membrane and escape from the circulation. 
To study that process, my colleagues and I extracted basement membranes from animal tissues.
When metastatic tumor cells were placed on the isolated basement membranes, they attached avidly.
Beneath the attached tumor cells, a zone of lysis then formed in which basement membrane proteins fragmented. 
Finally, the tumor cells migrated into and penetrated the disrupted region of the basement membrane.

From these results, we determined that the invasion of the basement membrane barrier is a three-step process.
The first step is the adhesion of the tumor cell to the basement membrane.
The adhesion is mediated by specific receptors on the tumor cell surface that recognize components of the basement membrane.
The second step is the activation of destructive enzymes that cleave or unravel basement membrane molecules immediately beneath the tumor cell.
The third step is the protrusion of the tumor cell's pseudopodia (amoeboid false feet) into the zone of lysis, followed by migration of the entire tumor cell. 

The three steps of tumor cell invasion-adhesion, enzymatic modification of the membrane and migration-must be tightly coordinated and properly timed.
While the advancing front of the tumor cell surface activates destructive enzymes to cleave obstructing protein molecules, the rear of the tumor cell must remain firmly attached to the extracellular matrix.
Once the path ahead is opened, the tumor cell has to switch activities so that the enzymes are turned off and the cell can advance.
This switch is necessary because, to move forward, the invading tumor cell must grab onto the matrix in the direction of travel, pull itself forward and release any attachments at the rear of the cell.
In other words, an invading tumor cell must simultaneously bore a tunnel, grip the sides of the tunnel and propel itself forward.

That striking behavior is not unique to metastatic cancer cells: from time to time, normal cells, too, must invade other tissues in the body.
Normal invasive behavior occurs, for example, during the implantation of the placenta in the wall of the uterus and during the formation of organs in the embryo. 
Circulating white blood cells must penetrate the walls of blood vessels to reach a site of infection.
Networks of blood vessels are established by the migration and invasion of endothelial cells-they pass through extracellular matrix barriers and enter regions of tissues that require the nutrients and oxygen a new vascular system can supply.

In all these cases, the mechanism of invasion by the normal cells is likely to be generally the same as that used by tumor cells.
There is nonetheless a crucial difference in the regulation of the processes: when the stimulus for a normal invasion is removed, the cells stop.
Malignant cells can migrate relentlessly and penetrate tissue barriers at times and places that would be inappropriate for normal cells.

Questions about how normal cells and metastatic tumor cells are regulated prompted my colleagues and me to search for genes and proteins characteristically associated with invasion.
We have met with some success.
One surprising result of our studies was that negative regulatory proteins-those that inhibit invasive behavior in normal and cancerous cells-may be just as important as positive factors that promote aggressiveness. 
That discovery has led us to propose the existence of metastasis suppressor genes:
genes that encode proteins capable of suppressing the key steps of metastasis.

The concept of genes that suppress metastasis parallels the recent work by Robert Weinberg of the Whitehead Institute and Bert Vogelstein of Johns Hopkins University, who have shown the importance of genes that suppress cancer cell growth.
Weinberg and Vogelstein proposed that the loss or mutation of certain regulatory genes, such as the p53 gene and the retinoblastoma gene, will lead to abnormal, uncontrolled cell growth-the first step in the development of a cancer.
The next critical step is the transition of the tumor from mere growth to invasion and metastasis.

During that transition, some genetic events cause tumor cells to increase their production of proteins that stimulate migration and enzymes that cleave the extracellular matrix.
Those same cells may also stop expressing metastasis suppressor proteins that usually block benign tumor cells from turning into metastatic ones.

To identify enzymes important for invasion, we compared the enzymes produced in cultures of metastatic invasive cells with those of nonmetastatic tumor cells.

We took advantage of cancer cell lines isolated by Isaiah Fidler of M. D. Anderson Hospital, the scientist who first systematically produced lines of mouse tumor cells with different metastatic propensities.
Highly invasive tendencies, we observed, were associated with the increased production of a class of protein-cleaving enzymes called metalloproteinases.
After extending the studies to human cancers, we found that augmented levels of metalloproteinases in tumors correlated with the development of invasion and metastasis in cancers of the human breast, colon, stomach, thyroid, lung and liver.

At least eight members of the metalloproteinase gene family have been found so far.
All the metalloproteinases have similar structures, but they differ significantly in the types of protein they cleave.
One important protein cut by the metalloproteinases, for example, is collagen, a rod-shaped triple helical molecule that forms the framework for the extracellular matrix.
One variety, called type IV collagen, makes up the structural backbone of the basement membrane barrier.
Other types of collagen are characteristically found in other tissues.
Tumor cells therefore probably need to use more than one metalloproteinase, as well as other classes of destructive enzymes, to cross the varied tissue barriers they encounter. 

To prove that metalloproteinases were actually necessary for invasion, we treated tumor cells with antibodies that selectively blocked the activity of certain members of the metalloproteinase family.
The antibodies totally abolished the invasive action of the tumor cells in our tests.

Much of what has been learned about the structure and function of the metalloproteinases could someday lead to the development of drugs that prevent or arrest invasion and metastasis by blocking the action of the enzymes.
For example, we know that all the metalloproteinases are produced in an inactive form completely incapable of cleaving any protein molecule.
The inactivity of that form is caused by a highly conserved sequence of nine amino acids found at one end of all the metalloproteinase molecules. 

This sequence contains an extremely reactive residue of the amino acid cysteine.

In the inactive form the end of the molecule containing the sequence folds, and the cysteine residue interacts with the metal ion in the active site of the enzyme.
With its active site blocked in this way, the enzyme is unable to cleave its protein target.
Thus, the metalloproteinases are made with their own built- in inhibitors.

A metalloproteinase becomes active when its molecular shape changes and the cysteine-containing peptide (or protein fragment) is pulled away from the ion in the active site.
The metalloproteinase then snips off its own cysteine- containing peptide and becomes permanently active.
My colleagues and I have studied the conformational changes of metalloproteinases in samples of human tumors, and we have found that the enzymes do shift into a form associated with full activity.

This knowledge about metalloproteinases should have practical value.
One exciting possibility is that a drug mimicking the cysteine-containing peptide might be able to block metalloproteinase activity and thereby arrest or inhibit invasion and metastasis. 
Nevertheless, questions must still be answered concerning the problem of precisely what triggers the changes in the enzyme. 

One possibility is that other types of degradative enzymes in the tumor cell can activate a latent metalloproteinase by cutting off its inhibitory peptide.

Another possibility, recently proposed by William G. Stetler-Stevenson, my colleague in our metastasis research group, is that immobilized proteins on the surface of a tumor cell may activate the enzymes. 
These cell-surface activator proteins could provide the tumor cell with exquisite control over the local activity of the metalloproteinases.

Even an activated metalloproteinase, however, will fail to cleave its target if a powerful tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) is present.
Just as there is a family of metalloproteinases, there is also a family of TIMPs, with at least two members:
the original TIMP-l and the new TIMP-2, identified by Stetler-Stevenson. 
Both TIMPs can inhibit all the active metalloproteinases, but TIMP-2 has a further special affinity for the latent, or inactive, form of type IV collagenase, the metalloproteinase that cleaves type IV collagen.

TIMPs produced in normal tissues, such as cartilage and bone, may have an important role in guarding against the excessive breakdown of the extracellular matrix.
They may protect nerves from injury by preserving the basement membrane that surrounds nerve fibers.
TIMPs also potentially serve as regulators of cell growth in the blood vessels and bone marrow.

Tumor cells, too, can secrete TIMPs:
for instance, TIMP-2 is produced by many tumor cells.
The same malignant cell that produces a metalloproteinase may therefore also produce an inhibitor of it.
Enzyme function will occur only if the number of enzyme molecules is greater than the number of TIMP inhibitor molecules.
Thus, in this and all other aspects of cancer cell invasion, the outcome depends on the balance of both positive and negative regulatory proteins.

TIMPs are therefore metastasis suppressor proteins.
Several laboratories have shown that TIMP-l and TIMP-2 can halt the process of tumor cell invasion.
TIMP-2 can also block the formation of new blood vessels required to nourish the growing metastasis.
These encouraging results mean that TIMPs, or drugs that act like them, may offer an approach to prevent invasion or treat metastasis.

Another potential metastasis suppressor protein was recently discovered by Patricia S. Steeg of our metastasis research group. 
While screening for differences in genetic activity between metastatic and nonmetastatic mouse tumor cells, Steeg noticed that one gene was missing or inactive in the metastatic ones. 
The protein produced by the gene was consistently absent or deficient in many metastatic tumor cell lines and present at high levels in nonmetastatic tumor cells.
That protein became known as nm23 (nonmetastatic 23).

Clinical studies conducted by our group in the U.S. and by Colm Hennessy of the University of Newcastle and Narimichi Kimura of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology concluded that in a sample of primary breast cancers, low levels of nm23 were strikingly associated with metastasis and poor survival.

Conversely, high levels of nm23 correlated with the absence of metastasis and a very favorable prognosis for the patients.
Furthermore, more than half of the human breast cancers that could be analyzed for genetic alterations were missing one of the two copies of the nm23 gene. 
Indeed, normal breast tissue and noninvasive breast lesions have high levels of nm23 .
Alterations in nm23 therefore correlate strongly with the transition to invasion and metastasis.

This pattern has been observed not only in breast cancer but also in other types of cancer.

If adequate levels of normal nm23 protein offer protection against breast cancer, then measurements of nm23 in breast tumors could have clinical value.
A significant number of women with newly diagnosed breast cancer have no clinical evidence of metastasis.
Yet we know that approximately 25 to 30 percent of these patients have hidden metastases too small to produce symptoms.
Measurements of nm23 and other biochemical indicators now under study may help pathologists identify patients most at risk for hidden metastases so that they can be treated in a timely fashion.

The nm23 protein may eventually play a part in treatment as well as in diagnosis.
In the laboratory, Steeg inserted the gene for nm23 into cultured metastatic cells, thereby augmenting their expression of nm23 . 
When these cells were injected into mice, they failed to form metastases.
We can speculate that if the nm23 gene could be introduced into tumor cells in the body by some as yet undeveloped gene therapy, metastasis could be arrested. 

How does nm23 inhibit metastasis?
We know that the nm23 protein has enzyme activity that allows it to attach inorganic phosphate groups to protein molecules. 
Such phosphate groups can modify the activities of proteins, including those that regulate growth signals and differentiation. 
We also know that nm23 is not secreted out of the cell.
Other than these facts, however, we still do not understand the function of the nm23 protein.

Perhaps the normal function of nm23 will be revealed through studies of its fascinating conservation through millions of years of evolution.
Human nm23 is virtually identical to awd, a fruit fly protein studied by Allan Shearn of Johns Hopkins.
In the fruit fly, awd is required for the correct formation of all the adult epithelial organs: the brain, the eyes, the wings, the legs and the reproductive organs. 
By analogy, we can speculate that nm23 has an important- function in the normal organization and communication of human cells.
During development, normal tissue cells communicate with one another to produce an organ that has the correct size and shape.
The loss or aberrant regulation of nm23 may contribute to an unstable cellular state that favors the autonomous and metastatic behavior of tumor cells. 

Predicting or preventing future metastasis is a very important clinical goal.

One that is equally important but more urgent is the eradication of known metastases in cancer patients.
Molecular studies of the communication pathways that regulate invasion and colony growth by tumor cells has led Elise Kohn, another member of our metastasis research group, to recognize a new class of synthetic compounds, called carboxyamide aminoimidazoles (CAIs).

When administered orally, CAIs block the growth of established metastases in animals.
As Chris Felder of the National Institute of Mental Health and Donald Hupe of Merck & Co. have shown, CAI compounds alter the flow of calcium ions into the cell.
We believe this change may interfere with the signals that stimulate the growth of metastatic colonies.
Laboratory experiments have demonstrated that CAIs can arrest the growth of various human solid tumors, including melanomas (highly metastatic tumors of skipigment cells) and cancers of the colon, breast and prostate.

By the time this article appears, phase I clinical trials of this new CAI treatment will have already started here at the National Cancer Institute.
This is an exciting time for all students of metastasis and cell invasion:
after more than a century and a half of research, medical science may finally be able to turn the understanding of metastasis to the good of patients.
The range of approaches to the problem has never been wider, and the prospects for success have never been brighter. 
