
Cancer Genetics

Present evidence indicates that approximately 30-40% of us will die of cancer.
Largely due to the increasing proportion of our population in older age groups, cancer is increasing in frequency.
As shown in this chapter, the causes of cancer are a mixture of genetic and environmental components.
Dramatic advances in molecular biology and genetics have now clarified the basic molecular elements of cancer and provide a schematic outline of the cellular events leading to cancer. 
This understanding will be crucially important in the control of cancer, providing the beginnings of a base of knowledge that should lead to significantly improved therapies and possibly prevention.

Cancer is a collection of disorders that share the common feature of uncontrolled cell growth.
This leads to a mass of cells termed a neoplasm (Greek for "new formation"), or tumor .
Malignant neoplasm can invade nearby tissues and eventually metastasize (spread) to more distant sites in the body. 
The capacity to invade and metastasize distinguishes malignant from benign neoplasm.
Tumors can be classified according to the tissue type in which they arise.
Major types of tumors include those of epithelial tissue ( carcinomas ), connective tissue ( sarcomas ), lymphatic tissue ( lymphomas ), glial cells of the central nervous system ( gliomas ), and hematopoietic organs ( leukemias ).
The cells composing a tumor are usually derived from a single ancestral cell, making them a single clone ( monoclonal ).

The basic biologic features of carcinogenesis (cancer development) are clear.
Throughout our lives, many of our cells continue to grow and differentiate.
These form, for example, the epithelial layers of our lungs and colons and the precursors of the cells of our immune systems. 
Relatively undifferentiated stem cells produce large numbers of progeny cells to repopulate and renew our worn defensive layers.
Through integration of information provided by a complex array of biochemical signals, the new cells are designed to commit themselves to stop growing and differentiate into a cell type appropriate for their heritage and circumstances (Fig. 9-1).

Occasionally one of these cells loses its ability to respond appropriately to environmental and internal signals.
It fails to differentiate, continuing to divide without restraint. 
The descendants of these cells become the founders of neoplasm, capable of further evolution into invasive, metastatic cancer.
Our goals are to understand in detail what has gone wrong in such rogue cells, to detect them very early in their careers and, ultimately to intervene in their development, eliminating them from their host systems.

All cells in the body are "programmed" to develop, grow, differentiate, and die in response to a complex system of biochemical signals.
Cancer results when any cell is freed from these constraints and its abnormal progeny are allowed to proliferate.

Figure 9.1

In response to environmental signals, a cell may continue to divide, differentiate, or die (apoptosis).

CAUSES OF CANCER

Genetic Considerations

Genetic events are the primary basis of carcinogenesis. 
We can create cancer in animal models by damaging specific genes.
In cell culture systems, we can reverse a cancer phenotype by introducing normal copies of the damaged genes into the cell.
Most of the genetic events that cause cancer occur during the lifetime of the individual, in his or her somatic tissues.
The frequency of these events can be altered by exposure to mutagens, thus establishing the link to environmental carcinogens.
Because these genetic events occur in somatic cells, they are not transmitted to future generations.
Even though they are genetic events, they are not inherited. 
It is possible, however, for cancer-predisposing mutations to occur in germline cells.
This results in the transmission of cancer-causing genes from one generation to the next, producing families that have a high frequency of specific cancers (Fig. 9-2).

Such "cancer families," although rare, demonstrate that inheritance of a damaged gene can cause cancer.
In these families inheritance of one mutant allele seems sufficient to cause a specific form of cancer:
almost all individuals who inherit the mutant allele will develop the tumor.
The childhood cancer of the eye, retinoblastoma, is a good example. 
As discussed in Chapter 4, those who inherit a mutant version of the retinoblastoma gene have approximately a 90% chance of developing one or more retinoblastoma tumors.

Although the transmission of cancer as a single gene disorder is relatively uncommon, there is good evidence for a more general pattern of clustering of some cancer types in families.
For many kinds of cancer, such as breast and colon, the diagnosis of the cancer in a first-degree relative results in a severalfold increase in one's own risk of developing the cancer.
The genetic basis for this apparent familiality of cancer remains obscure.
However, it is possible that genetic transmission of altered forms of specific genes is responsible.

The extent to which each of these mechanisms -germline (inherited) mutations versus mutations occurring in somatic cells-contributes to human cancer is an important question.
If inherited predispositions are significant determinants of an individual's risk of acquiring a specific form of cancer, it should ultimately be possible to identify at-risk individuals.
More intensive screening of defined high-risk populations could result in early detection and intervention, leading to better prognoses for individuals and lowered morbidity and mortality in the population.

The basic cause of cancer is damage to specific genes. 
Usually mutations in these genes accumulate in somatic cells over the years, until a cell loses a critical number of growth control mechanisms and initiates a tumor.
If damage occurs in cells of the germ line, however, an altered form of one of these genes can be transmitted to progeny and predispose them to cancer.

Figure 9.2

A familial colon cancer pedigree. Darkened symbols represent individuals diagnosed with colon cancer. 

Environmental Considerations 

What is the role of the environment in carcinogenesis? 
At the level of the cell, cancer is intrinsically genetic. 
Tumor cells arise when certain changes, or mutations, occur in genes that are responsible for regulating the cell's growth.
However, the frequency and consequences of these mutations can be altered by a large number of environmental factors. 
It is well documented, for example, that many chemicals that cause mutation in experimental animals also cause cancer and are thus carcinogens .
Thus, neither genetics nor environment is the sole determinant of carcinogenesis; both play key roles in this process.

Two additional lines of argument support the idea that exposure to environmental agents can significantly alter an individual's risk of cancer.
The first is that a number of environmental agents with carcinogenic properties have been identified.
For example, cigarette smoke has been shown, both epidemiologically and in laboratory experiments, to cause lung cancer.
Roles for other environmental agents in specific cancers are also well documented (e.g., uranium dust in lung cancer among miners and asbestos exposure in lung cancer and mesothelioma).

The second line of argument is based on epidemiologic comparisons among populations with differing lifestyles.
Many kinds of cancer have different frequencies in different populations. 
Breast cancer, for example, is prevalent among northern Europeans and Americans but relatively rare among women in developing countries.
It is usually difficult, however, to determine whether such dissimilarities reflect differences in lifestyle or in gene frequencies.

Examination of genetically similar populations under differing lifestyles provides an opportunity to evaluate the genetic and environmental components of cancer.
Epidemiologic studies among migrant Japanese populations, for example, have yielded important findings with respect to colon cancer.
This type of cancer is relatively rare in the Japanese population living in Japan but is the second most common form of cancer in the United States.
Stomach cancer, conversely, is frequent in Japan, but relatively rare in the United States.
These statistics in themselves cannot distinguish environmental from genetic influences in the two populations.
However, because large numbers of Japanese have emigrated, first to Hawaii and then to the U.S. mainland, we can observe what happens to the rates of stomach and colon cancer among the migrants.
Importantly, the Japanese emigres have maintained a genetic identity, marrying largely among themselves.

In the U.S. population as a whole, the lifetime risk of colon cancer is approximately 5%; in Japan that risk is 10-fold lower, only 0.5%.
Among the first-generation Japanese in Hawaii, the frequency of colon cancer rises severalfold, not yet as high as in the U.S. mainland, but higher than in Japan. 
Among second-generation Japanese on the U.S. mainland, the colon cancer rates are 5%, equal to the U.S. average.
At the same time, stomach cancer has become relatively rare among Japanese-Americans.
These observations strongly indicate an important role for environment or lifestyle in the etiology of colon cancer.

Are we then to assume that genetic factors play no role in colon cancer?
The fact remains that in the North American environment some individuals will get colon cancer and others will not.
This distinction can result from differences within this environment (e.g., dietary variation) as well as differences in genetic predisposition:
inherited genes that increase the individual's probability of developing cancer. 
To account for the difference in colon cancer frequency between Japanese living in the United States and in Japan, however, we argue that environmental features in Japan render the predisposing genes less penetrant.
Furthermore, a genetic component is strongly suggested by the severalfold increase in risk to an individual when a first-degree relative has colon cancer. 
It is likely, then, that cancer risk is a composite of both genetics and environment, with interaction between the two components.

Environmental factors are known to play important roles in carcinogenesis.
Because some individuals within the same environment develop cancer and some do not, cancer risk evidently depends upon interaction between inherited factors and environmental components.

INHERITED CANCER GENES

Genetic Control of Cell Growth and Differentiation

Cancers form when the growth and differentiation of cells are deregulated.
The past two decades have witnessed the identification of more than 100 cancer-causing genes that encode substances that normally regulate the cellular processes of growth and differentiation.
Characterization of the biochemical activities and interactions of these gene products have revealed an increasingly detailed picture of the normal regulation of cell growth and differentiation and the ways in which these processes become deregulated by the events of carcinogenesis.

The fundamental features of this process are now well understood (Fig. 9-3).
First, mach of cell regulation is mediated by external signals coming to the cell through polypeptide growth factors (e.g., platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, steroid hormones, and others) produced in other cells.
Each growth factor interacts with a specific growth factor receptor located on the cell surface.
Binding of a growth factor activates the receptor, triggering molecules that send messages to the cell's nucleus in a process termed signal transduction .
These signal transduction molecules include protein kinases , enzymes which can alter the activity of target proteins by phosphorylating them.
The ultimate stage of the signal transduction pathway is regulation of DNA transcription in the nucleus.
Components of the signal transduction cascade interact with nuclear DNA-binding proteins (transcription factors ) that regulate the activity of specific genes that influence cellular growth and proliferation.
Genes that encode these nuclear DNA-binding proteins include myc , fos , and jun .

The regulation of cell growth is accomplished by substances that include:

1 polypeptide growth factors that transmit signals from one cell to another,
2 growth factor receptors on the cell surface,
3 signal transduction molecules that activate a cascade of phosphorylating reactions within the cell, and
4 nuclear transcription factors.

After several rounds of cell division, cells normally receive extracellular signals that tell them to stop growing and to differentiate into specialized cells.
The signals may come by way of polypeptides, steroid hormones, or from direct contact with adjacent cells.
The signals are transduced to the nucleus of the recipient cell where, by altering the transcription patterns among genes that govern the steps of the cell cycle, they initiate progression down a differentiation pathway.

The cell, then, is capable of integrating and interpreting the host of signals it receives from its environment.
Decisions to grow and divide, or to stop growing and differentiate, result from processing of the signals.
The pattern of events occurring in a specific cell is determined by its history and location, which dictate the cell's instantaneous production of gene products.

A cancer cell may emerge from within a population of growing cells, through the accumulation of several independent mutations in the genes that encode the factors we have been discussing. 
Although these events occur only rarely, the affected cells fail to respond to differentiation signals and continue to grow.
Furthermore, cancers seem usually to result from a progressive series of events that incrementally increase the extent of deregulation within a cell lineage; eventually, a cell emerges whose descendants multiply without appropriate restraints.
Further changes give these cells the capacity to invade adjacent tissues and form metastases.
The requirement for more than one mutation has been characterized as the "multihit concept of carcinogenesis." An example of this concept is given by colorectal cancer, in which a number of genetic events are required to complete the progression from a benign growth to a malignant neoplasm (Fig. 9-4).

Mutations may occur in any of the steps involved in regulating cell growth and differentiation.
When such mutations accumulate within a cell lineage, the progressive deregulation of growth eventually produces a cell whose progeny form a tumor. 

Figure 9.3

The major features of cellular regulation: external growth factors (proteins and steroid hormones such as epidermal growth factor) bind to membrane-spanning growth factor receptors on the cell surface

These activate signal transduction pathways, in which genes such as ras participate.
Components of the signal transduction pathway in turn interact with nuclear transcription factors, such as myc and fos, which can bind to regulatory regions in DNA.

Figure 9.4

The pathway to colon cancer

Loss of the APC gene (adenomatous polyposis coli) transforms normal epithelial tissue lining the gut to hyperproliferating tissue.
Hypomethylation of DNA, activation of the k-ras proto-oncogene, and loss of the DCC (deleted in colon cancer) gene are involved In the progression to a benign adenoma.
Loss of the p53 gene and other alterations are involved in the progression to malignant carcinoma and metastasis. 

The Inherited Cancer Gene Versus the Somatically Altered Gene

Although cancer families have long been recognized, it was not until the early 1970s that we began to understand the relationship between the inherited genetic aberrations and the carcinogenic events that occur in somatic tissue.
In 1971 A.G. Knudson's analysis of retinoblastoma, a disease already mentioned as a model of inherited cancer, led him to a hypothesis that opened a new window into the mechanism of carcinogenesis. 
In the genetic form of retinoblastoma (see Chapter 4), a parent is likely to be affected and, if so, there is a 50% chance of genetic transmission to each of the offspring.
In the "sporadic" form, neither parent is affected and there is no additional risk to other progeny.
A key distinguishing feature between the two forms is that inherited retinoblastoma is usually bilateral (affects both eyes), whereas sporadic retinoblastoma usually involves only a single tumor and, therefore, only one eye (unilateral).

Knudson reasoned that at least two mutations maybe required to create a retinoblastoma.
One of the mutations would alter the retinoblastoma gene; if this happened in the germline, it would be present in all cells of a child receiving the mutant allele.
The second mutation would be an additional, unspecified genetic event in an already altered cell.
The hypothesis of a second event was required to explain why only a tiny fraction of the retinoblasts of an individual who has inherited a mutant retinoblastoma gene actually gives rise to tumors.
Knudson's hypothesis is known as the two-hit model of carcinogenesis .

Inherited retinoblastoma would thus be caused by the inheritance of one of the genetic "hits" as a constitutional mutation (i.e., a mutation present in all cells of the body).
Individuals who inherited one hit would require only one additional mutational event in a single retinoblast for that cell to seed a tumor clone.
In sporadic (noninherited) cases, both mutations would have to occur independently within the same retinoblast, a highly improbable combination of rare events even in the million or so cells of the target tissue. 
The child who developed a retinoblastoma by this two-hit somatic route, therefore, was unlikely to develop more than one tumor.
The individual inheriting a mutant retinoblastoma gene, however, needed only a single, additional genetic hit to a retinoblast for a tumor clone to develop.
Knudson argued that such an event was likely to occur in several of the million or so retinoblasts, thus explaining the bilaterality of inherited retinoblastoma. 

An important corollary of this hypothesis is that the genes inherited in mutant form in familial tumor syndromes are the same genes as those that generate cancer by somatic mutation. 
By understanding the nature of the mutant alleles inherited in rare cancer families, therefore, we will come to understand more about the somatic pathway to common cancer as well.
The converse is likewise true: understanding the nature of somatically mutated genes can help in understanding the inherited versions.

Alfred Knudson's two-hit theory of carcinogenesis in retinoblastoma became the paradigm for a model to describe how inheritance of an altered gene predisposes the gene carrier to cancer.
The theory states that a cell can initiate a tumor only when it contains two damaged alleles;
therefore a person who inherits one copy of a mutant retinoblastoma gene must experience a second, somatic mutation in one or more retinoblasts to develop one or more retino-blastomas.
Two somatic mutations can also occur in a single retinoblast of a non-predisposed fetus, producing sporadic retinoblastoma.

The Retinoblastoma Gene and Tumor Suppressors 

What is the nature of the second hit?
Again with retinoblastoma as the paradigm, two possibilities seemed plausible at first:

1 the second mutation could affect the function of a gene distinct from the retinoblastoma gene, and the presence of two mutant genes in the same cell would result in the tumor; or
2 the second event could inactivate or alter the remaining (normal) copy of the retinoblastoma gene.

The second hit might sometimes involve the consistent loss of a chromosome or an extensive deletion of a specific chromosome region that contains the retinoblastoma gene.
Such large scale chromosomal losses should be detectable with DNA markers if the second possibility is correct.

Losses of marker DNA near the retinoblastoma gene (RB) , now identified and known to lie on chromosome 13, occur in more than 50% of retinoblastoma.
Several mechanisms, including point mutation, deletion, and somatic recombination, can produce such a loss (Fig. 9-5).
The observation of DNA loss shows that the second hit, which occurs in the fetus during the period in which retinoblasts are rapidly dividing and proliferating, has removed the remaining allele of this gene. 
This implies that a cell with one mutant RB allele and one normal RB allele cannot form a tumor.
Thus the product of the normal gene, even when present only in a single copy, prevents tumor formation.
The term tumor suppressor has been coined to describe the RB gene and a growing list of other cancer-associated genes (Table 9-1).

Characteristic of tumor suppressors is the somewhat perplexing feature that inherited mutations are dominant alleles at the level of the individual (heterozygous individuals usually develop the disease) but recessive alleles at the level of the cell (heterozygous cells do not form tumors).
This apparent contradiction is resolved by realizing that only a single tumor cell is required, from a population of millions of normal cells, to initiate a tumor in the individual.
Thus in individuals who have inherited the first hit, a second hit that occurs in any one cell will cause a tumor.
Because of the large size of the target retinoblast population, heterozygous individuals form, on the average, several retinoblasts homozygous for an RB mutation, each of which leads to a retinoblastoma.

The discovery that retinoblastoma results when bath alleles of the same locus on chromosome 13 are inactivated in the same retinoblast lad to the concept of tumor suppressor genes.
The products of such genes suppress tumor formation by controlling cell growth, and can do so even if a cell contains only one normal version of the gene.

Because of the pivotal role of tumor suppressors in the prevention of tumor formation, their study is of considerable medical significance.
By understanding how cancer is naturally suppressed by the body, we can ultimately develop more effective medical therapies for tumor prevention and treatment.

Figure 9.5

Persons inheriting an RB mutation are heterozygous for the mutation in all cells of their body.

The second hit occurs during embryonic development and may consist of a point mutation, deletion, loss of the normal chromosome and duplication of the abnormal one, and somatic recombination. 
Each process leads to homozygosity for the mutant R~ allele and thus tumor development.

Another Class of Cancer Genes, the Oncogenes

A second specific class of genes that can cause cancer is termed oncogenes (i.e., cancer genes). 
Most oncogenes originate from proto-oncogenes , which are genes that are involved in the four basic mechanisms of cell growth regulation mentioned above (i.e., growth factors and their receptors, signal transduction molecules, and nuclear transcription factors).
When a mutation occurs in a proto-oncogene, it can become an oncogene, a gene whose product can upset normal cell growth and differentiation.
When an oncogene causes a cell to proceed from regulated to unregulated growth, the cell is said to have been transformed .
Unlike most tumor suppressors, oncogenes are usually dominant at the cellular level: only a single copy of a mutated oncogene is required to contribute to the multistep process of tumor progression. 
In this section we review three approaches that have been used to identify specific oncogenes.

Retroviral Definition

Retroviruses , a type of RNA virus, are capable of using reverse transcriptase to transcribe RNA into DNA.
In this way a retrovirus can insert its genes into the DNA of a host cell.
The first oncogenes to be identified came from the study of retroviruses that cause cancer in animal systems.
These retroviruses carry altered versions of growth-promoting genes into cells.
In an earlier cycle of infection, a retrovirus may have incorporated an oncogene from the genome of its host.
When the retrovirus invades a new cell, it can transfer the oncogene into the genome of the new host, thus transforming the cell.

Multifactorial Inheritance and Common Diseases

The focus of previous chapters has been on diseases that are caused by single genes or by abnormalities of single chromosomes. 
Much progress has been made in identifying specific mutations that cause these diseases, leading to better risk estimates and in some cases more effective treatment of the disease.
However, these conditions form only a small portion of the total burden of human genetic disease.
Most congenital malformations are not caused by single genes or chromosome defects.
Many common adult diseases, such as cancer, heart disease, and diabetes, have genetic components' but again they are usually not caused by single genes or by chromosome abnormalities.
These diseases, whose treatment collectively occupies the attention of most health care practitioners, are the result of a complex interplay of multiple genetic and environmental factors.

PRINCIPLES OF MULTIFACTORIAL INHERITANCE 

Basic Model

Traits in which variation is thought to be caused by the combined effects of multiple genes are polygenic (many genes).
When environmental factors are also believed to cause variation in the trait, which is usually the case, the term multifactorial is used.
Many quantitative traits (those, such as blood pressure, which are measured on a continuous numerical scale) are multifactorial.
Because they are caused by the additive effects of many genetic and environmental factors, these traits tend to follow a normal, or "bell-shaped," distribution in populations.

Let us use an example to illustrate this concept.
To begin with the simplest case, suppose (unrealistically) that height is determined by a single gene with two alleles, A and a .
Allele A tends to make people tall, whereas allele a tends to make them short.
If there is no dominance at this locus, then the three possible genotypes, AA , Aa , and aa , will produce three phenotypes: tall, intermediate, and short.
Assume that the gene frequencies of A and a are each 0.50.
If we look at a population of individuals, we will observe the height distribution depicted in Figure 10-1, A .

Now suppose, a bit more realistically, that height is determined by two loci instead of one.
The second locus also has two alleles, xxx (tall) and xxx (short), and they affect height in exactly the same way as alleles A and a .
There are now nine possible genotypes in our population: xxx .
An individual may have zero, one, two, three, or four "tall" alleles, so there are now five distinct phenotypes (Fig. 10-1, B).
Although the height distribution in our population is not yet normal, it approaches a normal distribution more closely than in the single-gene case above.

We now extend our example so that many genes and environmental factors influence height, each having a small effect.
Then there are many possible phenotypes, each differing slightly, and the height distribution approaches the bell-shaped curve shown in Figure 10-1, C.
It should be emphasized that the individual genes underlying a multifactorial trait such as height follow the mendelian principles of segregation and independent assortment, just like any other gene.
The only difference is that many of them act together to influence the trait.

Blood pressure is another example of a multifactorial trait. 
There is a correlation between parents' blood pressures (systolic and diastolic) and those of their children.
There is good evidence that this correlation is due in part to genes.
But blood pressure is also influenced by environmental factors, such as diet and stress.
One of the goals of genetic research is the identification and measurement of the relative roles of genes and environment in the causation of multifactorial diseases.

Many traits are thought to be influenced by multiple genes as well as environmental factors.
These traits are said to be multifactorial.
When they can be measured on a continuous scale, they often follow a normal distribution. 

Figure 10.1

A, The distribution of height in a population, assuming that height is controlled by a single locus with genotypes AA , Aa , and aa . 

The distribution of height, assuming that height is controlled by two loci.
There are now five distinct phenotypes instead of three, and the distribution be gins to look more like the normal distribution.
C, Distribution of height, assuming that multiple factors, each with a small effect, contribute to the trait (the multifactorial model).

Threshold Model

A number of diseases do not follow the bell-shaped distribution. 
Instead they appear to be either present or absent in individuals.
Yet they do not follow the patterns expected of single-gene diseases.
A commonly used explanation for such diseases is that there is an underlying liability distribution for the disease in a population (Fig. 10-2). 
Those individuals who are on the low end of the distribution have little chance of developing the disease in question (i.e., they have few of the alleles or environmental factors that would cause the disease).
Those who are closer to the high end of the distribution have more of the disease-causing genes and environmental factors and are more likely to develop the disease. 
For diseases that are either present or absent, it is thought that a threshold of liability must be crossed before the disease is expressed.
Below the threshold the individual appears normal; above it he or she is affected by the disease.

A disease that is thought to correspond to this threshold model is pyloric stenosis, a disorder that presents shortly after birth and is caused by a narrowing or obstruction of the pylorus, the area between the stomach and intestine.
Chronic vomiting, constipation, weight loss, and electrolyte imbalance result from the condition, but it sometimes resolves spontaneously or can be corrected by surgery.
The prevalence of pyloric stenosis is about 3 per 1000 live births in whites.
It is much more common in males than females, affecting 1 of 200 males and 1 of 1000 females.
It is thought that this difference in prevalence reflects two thresholds in the liability distribution, a lower one in males and a higher one in females (see Fig. 10-2).
A lower male threshold implies that fewer disease-causing factors are required to generate the disorder in males.

The liability threshold concept may explain the pattern of recurrence risks for pyloric stenosis seen in Table 10-1. 
Notice that males, having a lower threshold, always have a higher risk than females.
However, the sibling risk also depends on the sex of the proband.
It is higher when the proband is female than when the proband is male.
This reflects the concept that females, having a higher liability threshold, must be exposed to more disease-causing factors than males in order to develop the disease.
Thus a family with an affected female must have more genetic and environmental risk factors, producing a higher recurrence risk for pyloric stenosis in future offspring.
We would expect that the highest risk category would be male relatives of female probands; Table 10-1 shows that this is indeed the case.

A similar pattern has been observed in a recent study of infantile autism, a behavioral disorder in which the male-female sex ratio is approximately xxx .
As expected for a multifactorial disorder, the recurrence risk for siblings of male probands (3.5%) was substantially lower than that of siblings of female probands (7%).
When the sex ratio for a disease is reversed (i.e., more affected females than males), we would expect a higher recurrence risk when the proband is male.

A number of other congenital malformations are thought to correspond to this model.
They include isolated [1] cleft lip and/or cleft palate xxx , neural tube defects (anencephaly and spinabifida), club foot (talipes), and some forms of congenital heart disease xxx .
In addition, many of the common adult diseases, such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus (types I and II), and some cancers, are caused by complex genetic and environmental factors and can thus be considered multifactorial diseases.

The threshold model applies to many multifactorial diseases.
It assumes that there is an underlying liability distribution in a population and that a threshold on this distribution must be passed before a disease is expressed.

Figure 10.2

A liability distribution in a population for a multifactorial disease.

To be affected with the disease, an individual must exceed the threshold on the liability distribution.
This figure shows two thresholds, a lower one for males and a higher one for females (as in pyloric stenosis).

Table 10.1

Recurrence risk (%) for pyloric stenosis, subdivided by genders of affected probands and relatives. 

[1] In this context, the term "isolated" means that this is the only observed disease feature (i.e., the feature is not part of a larger constellation of findings, as in cleft lip/palate secondary to trisomy 13). 

Recurrence Risks and Transmission Patterns

Whereas recurrence risks can be given with confidence for single-gene diseases (50% for typical autosomal dominant diseases, 25% for autosomal recessive diseases, etc.), the situation is more complicated for multifactorial diseases.
This is because the number of genes contributing to the disease is usually not known, the precise allelic constitution of the parents is not known, and the extent of environmental effects can vary substantially. 
For most multifactorial diseases, empirical risks (i.e., risks based on direct observation of data) have been derived.
To estimate empirical risks, a large series of families is examined in which one child has developed the disease (the proband).
Then the siblings of each proband are surveyed to calculate the percentage who have also developed the disease.
For example, in Great Britain about 5% of siblings of neural tube defect cases also have neural tube defects (Clinical Commentary 10-1).
Thus the recurrence risk for parents who have had one child with a neural tube defect is 5% in Great Britain.
For conditions such as cleft lip/palate, which are not lethal or severely debilitating, recurrence risks can also be estimated for the offspring of affected parents. 
Empirical recurrence risks are specific for each multifactorial disease.

In contrast to most single-gene diseases, recurrence risks for multifactorial diseases can change substantially from one population to another (notice the differences between the London and Belfast populations shown in Table 10-1).
This is because gene frequencies as well as environmental factors can differ among populations.
For example, the empirical risk for neural tube defects in North America is about 2% to 3%, somewhat lower than that of the British population.

Empirical recurrence risks for multifactorial diseases are based on studies of large collections of families. 
These risks are specific to a given population.

It is sometimes difficult to distinguish polygenic or multifactorial diseases from single-gene diseases that have reduced penetrance or variable expression.
Large data sets and good epidemiologic data are necessary to make the distinction.
Several criteria are usually used to define multifactorial inheritance:

1. The recurrence risk becomes higher if more than one family member is affected.
For example, the sibling recurrence risk for a ventricular septal defect ( VSD , a type of congenital heart defect) is 3% if one sibling has had a VSD but increases to approximately 10% if two siblings have had VSDs.
In contrast, the recurrence risk for single-gene diseases remains the same regardless of the number of affected siblings.
It should be emphasized that this increase does not mean that the family's risk has actually changed .
Rather, it means that we now have more information about the family's true risk:
Because they have had two affected children, they are probably located higher on the liability distribution than a family with only one affected child.
In other words, they have more risk factors (genetic and/or environmental) and are more likely to produce an affected child.

2. If the expression of the disease in the proband is more severe, the recurrence risk is higher.
This is again consistent with the liability model because a more severe expression indicates that the affected individual is at the extreme tail of the liability distribution (see Fig. 10-2).
His or her relatives are thus at a higher risk to inherit disease genes.
For example, the occurrence of a bilateral (both sides) cleft lip/palate confers a higher recurrence risk on family members than does the occurrence of a unilateral (one side) cleft. 

3. The recurrence risk is higher if the proband is of the less commonly affected sex (see the above discussion of pyloric stenosis).
This is because an affected individual of the less susceptible sex is usually at a more extreme position on the liability distribution.

4. The recurrence risk for the disease usually decreases rapidly in more remotely related relatives (Table 10-2). 
While the recurrence risk for single-gene diseases decreases by 50% with each degree of relationship (e.g., an autosomal dominant disease has a 50% recurrence risk for siblings, 25% for uncle-nephew relationships, 12.5% for first cousins), it decreases much more quickly for multifactorial diseases.
This reflects the fact that many genes and environmental factors must combine to produce a trait.
All of the necessary risk factors are unlikely to be present in less closely related family members. 

5. If the prevalence of the disease in a population is f , the risk for offspring and siblings of probands is approximately xxx .
This does not hold true for single-gene traits because their recurrence risks are independent of population prevalence.
It is not an absolute rule for multifactorial traits either, but many such diseases do tend to conform to this prediction.
Examination of the risks given in Table 10-2 shows that the first three diseases follow the prediction fairly well.
However, the observed sibling risk for the fourth disease, infantile autism, is substantially higher than predicted by xxx .

Risks for multifactorial diseases usually increase if
1 more family members are affected,
2 the disease has more severe expression, and
3 the affected proband is a member of the less commonly affected sex.

Recurrence risks decrease rapidly with more remote degrees of relationship.
In general the sibling recurrence risk is approximately equal to the square root of the prevalence of the disease in the population.

Clinical Commentary 10-1. Neural Tube Detects

Neural tube defects (NTDs), which include anencephaly, spina bifida, and encephalocele (as well as several other less common forms), are one of the most important classes of birth defects, with a newborn prevalence of 1 to 3 per 1000.
There is considerable variation in the prevalence of NTDs among various populations, with an especially high rate among some British and Irish populations (as high as 5 or more per 1000 births).
In the United States, NTDs are 2 to 3 times more common in the eastern than in the western parts of the country.
For reasons that are not fully known, the prevalence of NTDs has been decreasing in many parts of the United States and Europe during the past two decades. 

Normally the neural tube closes at about the fourth week of gestation.
A defect in closure or a subsequent reopening of the neural tube results in an NTD.
Spina bifida xxx is the most commonly observed NTD and consists of a protrusion of spinal tissue through the vertebral column (the tissue usually includes meninges, spinal cord, and nerve roots).
About 75% of spina bifida patients have secondary hydrocephalus xxx which sometimes in turn produces mental retardation.
Paralysis or muscle weakness, lack of sphincter control, and club fact are often observed.
A recent study conducted in British Columbia showed that survival rates for spina bifida patients have improved dramatically over the past several decades.
Fewer than 30% of cases born between 1952 and 1969 survived to age 10, whereas 65% of those born between 1970 and 1986 survived to this age.
Anencephaly xxx is characterized by partial or complete absence of the cranial vault and calvarium and partial or complete absence of the cerebral hemispheres.
At lest two thirds of anencephalics are stillborn;
term deliveries do not survive more than a few hours or days.
Encephalocele xxx consists of a protrusion of the brain into an enclosed sac.
It is seldom compatible with survival.

NTDs are thought to arise from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.
In most populations surveyed thus far, empirical recurrence risks for siblings of affected cases range from 2% to 5%.
Consistent with a multifactorial model, the recurrence risk increases with additional affected siblings.
Studies conducted in Great Britain showed that the sibling recurrence risk was approximately 5% when one sibling was affected and 10% when two were affected. A recent Hungarian study showed that the overall prevalence of NTDs was 1 in 300 births and that the sibling recurrence risks were 3%, 12%, and 25% after one, two, and three affected offspring, respectively.
Recurrence risks tend to be slightly lower in populations with lower NTD prevalence rates, as predicted by the multifactorial model.
Recurrence risk data support the idea that the major forms of NTDs are caused by similar factors.
An anencephalic conception increases the recurrence risk for subsequent spina bifida conceptions, and vice-versa.

NTDs can usually be diagnosed prenatally, sometimes by ultrasound and usually by an elevation in alpha-fetoprotein ( AFP) in the maternal serum or amniotic fluid (see Chapter 11).
A spina bifida lesion can be either open or closed (i.e., covered with a layer of skin).
Fetuses with open spina bifida are more likely to be detected by AFP assays.

A major recent epidemiologic finding is that mothers who supplement their diet with folic acid at the time of conception are less likely to produce children with NTDs.
This result has been replicated in several different populations and thus appears to be well confirmed.
It has been estimated that as many as 50% of NTDs can be avoided simply by dietary folic acid supplementation. (Traditional prenatal vitamin supplements would not have much effect, because administration does not usually begin until well after the time that the neural tube closes.) Because mothers would be likely to ingest similar amounts of folic acid from one pregnancy to the next, folic acid deficiency could well account for at least part of the elevated sibling recurrence risk for NTDs.
This is an important example of a nongenetic factor that contributes to familial clustering of a disease.

Figure 10.3

The major neural tube defects ( NTDs).

A, An infant with an open spina bifida (meningamyelcele). 
B, A fetus with anecephaly.
Note the abnormalities of the orbits of the eye and the cranial detect.
C, An occipital encephalocele.

Table 10.2

Recurrence risk (%) for first-, second-, and third-degree relatives.

Multifactorial versus Single-Gene Inheritance

It is important to clarify the difference between a multifactorial disease and a single-gene disease in which there is locus heterogeneity. 
In the former case, a disease is caused by the simultaneous operation of multiple genetic and environmental factors, each of which has a relatively small effect.
In contrast, a disease with locus heterogeneity, such as osteogenesis imperfecta, requires only a single mutation for its causation.
Because of locus heterogeneity, a chromosome 7 mutation may cause the disease in one family, whereas a chromosome 17 mutation may cause the disease in another family.
There is thus more than one gene that can cause the disease, but in a given individual a single gene causes the disease.

In some cases a trait may be influenced by the combination of both a single gene with large effects and a multifactorial "background" in which additional genes and environmental factors have individually small effects.
This concept is illustrated in Figure 10-4.
Imagine that variation in height, for example, is caused by a single locus (termed a major gene ) and a multifactorial component.
Individuals with the AA genotype will tend to be taller, those with the aa genotype will tend to be shorter, and those with Aa will tend to be intermediate.
But additional variation is caused by other factors (the multifactorial component). 
Thus those with the aa genotype will vary in height from 130 to about 170 cm, those with the Aa genotype will vary in height from 150 to 190 cm, and those with the AA genotype will vary from 170 to 210 cm.
There is substantial overlap among the three major genotypes because of the influence of the multifactorial background.
The total distribution of height, which is bell-shaped, is caused by the superposition of the three distributions about each genotype. 
Many of the diseases to be discussed next appear to have both major gene and multifactorial components in populations. 
Thus there are subsets of the population in which diseases, such as colon cancer, breast cancer, or heart disease, are inherited as single-gene disorders (with additional variation in disease susceptibility contributed by other genetic and environmental factors).
These subsets usually account for only a small percentage of the total number of disease cases.
It is nevertheless important to identify the responsible major genes, because their function can provide important clues to the pathophysiology and treatment of the disease.

Multifactorial diseases can be distinguished from single-gene disorders caused by mutations at different loci (locus heterogeneity).
Sometimes a disease may have both single-gene and multifactorial components.

Figure 10.4

The distribution of height, assuming the presence of a major gene (genotypes AA , Aa , and aa ) combined with a multifactorial background. 

The multifactorial background causes variation in height among individuals of each genotype.
If the distributions of each of the three genotypes are superimposed, then the overall distribution of height is approximately normal, as shown by the dotted line.
