
Strategies on the future of the chlorine industry 

C. Hendriks and D. Papameletiou 

Issue: 

Production and use of chlorine are of key importance for the chemical industry, with a large number of chlorinated compounds on the market, and nearly 60% of the global sales of chemical products being directly or indirectly linked with chlorine.
Besides its importance for the economy, chlorine has for many years been the subject of controversial debates because of adverse environmental and health impacts of many chlorinated organic compounds.
As a result of these debates, there is currently a world-wide trend to study how many of the chlorine uses can be substituted by other substances.

Relevance: 

Recent studies coming from authoritative sources in Member States of the EU have reached important conclusions about the necessity and feasibility for replacing chlorine with alternative substances in most of its uses.
The results of these studies may have significant repercussions for the chlorine industry in terms of its competitiveness, and its employment and environmental impacts, and they therefore need to be analysed closely with respect to their usefulness for policy making at EU level.

The debate on the future of the European chlorine industry has recently been fuelled by a study conducted by Prognos.
This study examined the manufacture of chlorine and its uses in Germany and found that elemental chlorine could be eliminated in more than 50% of its applications over the next 15-20 years, at a net cost increase of only 1%.
Another recent study by TNO and CML investigated the need for a move towards a chlorine free society.
On the basis of its results, the Dutch Ministry for the Environment concluded that the risks related to chlorine and the chlorinated compounds are largely manageable by already established policies.
A new policy on all chlorine compounds was therefore not recommended, although the Ministry recognised the need of combining existing policies with additional actions and instruments.

A 50% reduction in chlorine use is feasible over the next 15-20 years at 1% extra cost, according to the Prognos study.

Growth of the chlorine industry and its negative environmental reputation 

Since the beginning of this century, the chemical industry has expanded rapidly without the necessary scientific knowledge of the environmental chemistry, bioaccumulation, toxicity of chemicals, or of general environmental issues such as ozone layer destruction and long range air transport.
On the one hand this has allowed the chlorine industry to grow to its current size (see Box below), on the other hand it has led to several prominent cases where widely used chlorinated products had to be banned because of their eco- toxicity.
DDT, PCBs and CFCs represent some of the cases which have contributed to the poor environmental reputation, not only of the chlorine industry, but also of the element itself.
In the mean time, while the chlorine industry maintains that current scientific progress guarantees that similar cases will not be repeated again, several environmental organisations have been advocating a complete phaseout of chlorine.

Chlorine production in the world in kt/year: 

37 in 1900; 3000 in 1950; 37.000 in 1995.

Chlorine production in Europe (Euro- Chlor Federation) in kt/year: 

800 in 1950; 9.000 in 1995.

Chlorine use in Europe 12.500 kt in 1995 (94% of this amount were produced and used in 83 identified locations): 

- 34% recycled from used HCl (4,083 kt) and CHC [1] ( 223 kt)
- 66% from NaCl salt

Uses of chlorine in the world: 

Table

% of the market [3] .
% annual growth rate [4] .


Vinyl chloride monomer.
34.
+ 4.2.


Phosgene.
6.0 .
+ 2.5.


Hypochlorite.
2.5.
+ 2.


Titanium dioxide.
1.8.
+ 1.5.


Allyl chloride .
2.0.
+1.8.


Pulp and paper.
9.0.
- 6.0.


Propylene oxide.
7.0.
+0.8.


CHC (C1 and C2).
6.0.
- 4.5.


Chlorobenzene.
2.0.
- 0.8.


Water treatment.
5.4.
+ 0.7.


Employment:
- Europe: about 2 million jobs are related to the chlorine industry
- Germany: about 0.5 million jobs
- USA: about 1 million jobs

Turnover: 

Europe: 100 billion ECU per year are related to the chlorine industry.

Reviews of chorine use are no longer confined to environmental groups, but extend to governments and international bodies.

These organisations have been so successful in their campaign that we are now witnessing world-wide actions reviewing the scope of chlorine production and uses.
Furthermore, these actions are not only limited to the initiatives of environmental groups such as Greenpeace, but are increasingly undertaken by governments, such as the US, German and the Dutch, and international bodies, such as the Oslo and Paris Commissions for the Prevention of Marine Pollution, the Barcelona Convention on the Mediterranean Sea, the International Whaling Commission, the World Wilderness Conference, and the USA-Canada International Joint Commission, which are commissioning related studies aimed at analysing the current situation and screening policy options.

Current policy issues and related studies 

One of the most significant contributions to the chlorine debate over recent years has been the "Chlorine-Free Campaign" of Greenpeace International.
It claims to represent an international movement calling for a complete phaseout of chlorine.
Its argument is based on data relating to around 177 different organochlorines that have been found in the fat, blood, mothers milk, semen, and breath of the general population.
This analysis has led Greenpeace to conclude that organochlorines can cause damage to human reproductive systems, from the womb to adulthood and it warns that "we are confronting a persistent, global pollution burden that results in an universal exposure on a multigenerational time scale".

According to Greenpeace the current risk assessment procedures and predictions of safe pollution levels are at the route of the chlorine problem.

Greenpeace has been playing a particularly active role in the US debate on chlorine, where it has questioned the effectiveness of applied policies and instruments.
It claims that the discharges currently perceived as acceptable, slowly build up until they reach unacceptable levels, and that the capacity of the ecosystem to assimilate even very low dosages of pollutants that are either persistent in the environment or toxic, or both, is essentially zero.
On that basis, the current risk assessment procedures and predictions of safe pollution levels based on "good science", which allow organochlorines to be regulated individually are considered to be inadequate and are at the heart of the chlorine problem.
Greenpeace therefore recommends a re-examination of each use of chlorine, not on an individual basis but within a framework of a systematic phaseout strategy.

After being directly attacked on its risk assessment practices, the US EPA announced, in early 1994, its intention to develop a national strategy for substituting, reducing or prohibiting the use of chlorine and chlorinated compounds.

Related actions have been carried out by the International Joint Commission (IJC), an environmental-policy group organised by the US and Canadian governments.
The IJC focuses on water pollution in the Great Lakes region, which is associated to discharges of chlorinated substances from the pulp and paper industry.

In Europe, the Oslo and Paris Convention adopted a legally binding agreement in 1992, requesting the reduction of discharges and emissions of substances which are toxic, persistent and liable to bioaccumulate, in particular organohalogen substances, to levels that are not harmful to man or nature.
A ministerial declaration set a reduction target for the year 2000.
In this context, the Third North Sea Conference in 1990 agreed that chlor-alkali plants should meet low mercury emission standards by the end of 1996 and recommended a complete phase-out of chlorine-alkali plants using mercury cell technology by 2010.
In the Fourth North Sea Conference, held in June 1995, the Ministers re-confirmed the goals set in 1992 for the year 2000.

Recent amendments to the "Protocol for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea against Pollution from Land-based Sources", adopted by the Barcelona Convention, request the Contracting Parties to eliminate, to the fullest possible extent, inputs of substances that are toxic, persistent and liable to bioaccumulate.
Priority is given to aldrin, chlordane, DDT, dieldrin, dioxins and furans, endrin, heptachlor, hexachlorobenzene, mirex, PCBs, and toxaprene.

Systematic discussion of the problems arising from the chlorine industry in Germany has been carried out by the Enquete Commission of the German Bundestag on the "Protection of Humanity and the Environment".
The chlorine industry was selected not only because it is a key sector but also because the Enquete Commission deliberately wanted to tackle a topic which has been the subject of a controversial debate for many years.
The Commission identified a fundamental need to keep the chlorine flows within closed integrated production and application systems.
- In the case of Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) the members of the Commission did not agree on all points of the available German disposal strategies;
- In the case of chlorinated hydrocarbon solvents the Commission recommended their use should be minimised by ensuring leak-free processing cycles or by means of substitution;
- In the case of Propylene Oxide produced exclusively by the chlorohydrin process in Germany, the Commission suggested the examination of the oxiran process, an alternative chlorine-free production route. 
As a general interim conclusion the Commission expressed its unanimous support to a "partial conversion" of chlorine chemistry by using alternative technologies or substances, where this is ecologically necessary and economically and socially acceptable.

About 29% of chlorine use can be eliminated in Germany by switching to the oxiran process for producing propylene oxide, according to the Prognos study.

In parallel to the work of the Enquete Commission, a more detailed study has been undertaken in Germany by Prognos on behalf of the BMFT and the Ministry of Environment, Energy, and Federal Affairs of the Land Hessen.
Based on previous results, this study concludes that around 50% of PVC currently used can be substituted with no cost increase, and about 70% with a very moderate cost increase.
Concerning the use of chlorine in the production of propylene oxide, the study suggests that the alternative oxiran process is both economically viable and ecologically advantageous.
On the basis of this substitution alone, the Prognos study estimates that 29% of chorine use can be eliminated in Germany.
In the case of the chlorine involvement in the phosgene and polycarbonate chemistry, the study identified limited substitution opportunities which could lead to about 20% elimination of the chlorine use in this area (14% of total chlorine use).
Finally, concerning the epoxy resins, it concludes that 60% of the chlorine use can be eliminated by switching to an alternative low chlorine process for the production of epichlorhydrine and through substitution of some of the resins through chlorine free materials.
In total, the study claims that 50% of chlorine use could be eliminated over 15-20 years at a net cost increase of only 1%.

In the Netherlands, a detailed study recommended actions relating only to specific chlorinated compounds...

Another important study has been carried out recently by TNO and CML in the Netherlands.
The study was set up as a substance flow analysis, covering about 99% of the flows of chlorinated substances in the Netherlands.
It involved the compilation of an inventory of all emissions, waste generation, exports, imports and economical transactions and an assessment of their environmental impact using data sources such as the Dutch emission registration database, LCA-databases, industrial data etc.
The study concludes that, based on present knowledge about emissions and toxicological evaluation, there appears to be no inherent danger related to the chlorine chain, but that important uncertainties exist and require attention.

...with regards PVC the recommendations are moderate, suggesting its production and recycling be given further attention.

On the basis of these results, the Ministry for the Environment in the Netherlands decided against a specific policy for chlorine compounds in general, as they believe existing government policy to be sufficient for achieving emission reductions in the areas where chlorine presents the biggest environmental burden: climate change and water quality.
However, the Ministry recognised the need for supplementary measures to reduce the risk presented by certain chlorinated compounds.
Specific follow-up actions will therefore be taken concerning tetra-chloroethylene (dry- cleaning), di-chlorobenzene (mothballs and toilet fresheners), methyl chloride (paint stripper), and trichloroethylene (solvent).
Concerning the use of PVC, the recommendations of the study are moderate, suggesting further attention be given to it or to its recycling.
Further study is also expected on reducing emissions from hypochlorite which is used in household bleach, swimming pools, electricity power stations and industrial cooling-water systems.
No final conclusions could be made on the emissions from the 1% of the chlorine use in the Netherlands which is not monitored and the study therefore suggests further investigation of the so-called "micro-chlorines" that might be formed in low quantities in production processes.
These substances are not yet covered in the emission databases because their formation in small quantities and environmental impact is not well understood.
Some of them are believed to be persistent, toxic and liable to bioaccumulate.

In addition to these studies, an inventory of major accidents has been set up by the Major Accident Hazards Bureau (MAHB) of the European Commission, which runs a dedicated database called MARS.
MAHB states that 10% of the 230 accidents reported by the Member States involves mostly chlorine as a pure substance released from fixed installations, in addition to a few cases related to chlorinated compounds.

The strategies and position of industry: short-term and long-term visions are needed 

The visible part of industry's efforts is contributing to the controversy with environmental groups and the authorities.

Industry considers sound scientific criteria to be a firm priority for decision-making and it is therefore reluctant to accept simplified interpretations of eco-toxicological events.
Environmentalists believe this attitude is a systematic approach to delay action.

A less visible part of industry's agenda, with a long-term goals, is to develop alternative techniques and products that limit or eliminate chlorine use or abate the hazards from their use and final disposal.
There a several cases of successful innovation in industry and clear evidence that the traditional markets for chlorine are shrinking, such as the chlorinated solvents and the use of elemental chlorine in the pulp and paper industry.

In the USA, the chlorine industry responded to the EPA's announcement about a targeted chlorine strategy by reinforcing its Chlorine Chemistry Council, which later disseminated a study by Charles River Associates advocating that chlorine and its products are indispensable to the US economy.

In Germany, industry's position is clearly reflected in the evaluation of the Prognos study carried out by the Association of German Chemical Industries (VCI).
It argues that the study focuses too much on the German situation alone while ignoring the influence of the global market which is especially strong in the case of chlorine.
According to VCI, 'conversion of chlorine chemistry' should only be considered in cases of urgent ecological or toxicological necessity.
It goes on to state that such cases do not exist, and that the approach taken by the Prognos study for the ecological and economic assessment was invalid and in any case was based on incomplete, erroneous, or partly outdated literature data.
In reference to the economic viability of substituting the current propylene oxide production route by the oxiran process, VCI doubts whether investors would adopt this option even in new plants.
In addition, VCI claims that the ecological risks of the oxiran process were not taken into consideration by the Prognos study.
With regards PVC, VCI disagrees with the method and criteria applied by Prognos for evaluating the related ecological advantages of substituting PVC with other polymer materials.

At the European level and in view of the emerging actions to phase out the use of chlorine, Euro Chlor, the Brussels based federation of European chlorine manufacturers, has begun a campaign to persuade the public that chlorine is essential in many important human activities and has tried to reduce the potential risks as far as possible.
It argues that there is a sustainable future for a number of chlorine uses which present no risk to the environment.
In this context Euro Chlor's top priority is to gather information on the health and environmental impact of chlorine-based products.
A related data base known as Co-ordinated Orbital Monitoring Programme Alarm Security System (COMPASS) is being set up to monitor world-wide scientific information on products containing chlorine.

The possibility that chlorinated compounds mimic oestrogens needs to be investigated further.

R & D needs and priorities 

Concerns have been raised recently over the possibility that chemicals present in the environment may mimic the action of the animal and human hormones, oestrogens.
The hypothesis is that these chemicals may bind with oestrogen receptors to produce a variety of undesirable side effects on the reproductive system.
However, it is generally recognised that we are a few years away from understanding the underlying hypotheses, mechanisms or any structural activity relationship relating to oestrogen mimicry.
Euro Chlor is working with CEFIC on this issue, as it believes there is insufficient scientific evidence to implicate chlorinated compounds with any reproductive abnormalities.
Other areas where further research is needed include associated endocrine problems; evaluation of the risk associated with chlorinated compounds in drinking water; so-called micro-chlorines; the metabolism of emitted compounds; and the combined toxicity of chemicals.

Generally, the need for improved procedures for 'risk management in uncertainty' and 'life cycle analysis' are expected to be a major issue in future debates.
Research in this area is considered to be a clear priority.

Conclusions 

The refinement of existing tools for risk assessment and management would certainly help to resolve the current controversy about the future of the chlorine industry.

The industry is defending, with all available technical and scientific knowledge and resources, the major traditional uses of chlorine in the plastics industry such as in PVC, propylene oxide and epoxy resins.
In these cases, improvements in modern recycling and incineration techniques are considered as promising justification for further long- term investments despite the current controversial debate.

An EU Action Plan for chlorine would help harmonise measures between Member States and contribute to more constructive dialogue with industry

At EU level, a policy initiative concerning an overall chlorine strategy has not yet been planned.
However, as several Member States and the USA are taking advanced positions on chlorine, an EU action plan would be desirable in order to provide a framework in which to harmonise measures of Member States, and guidelines for positioning the EU interests in international negotiations.
Furthermore, it would also help the industry concerned to enter a more constructive dialogue.

Regarding risk assessment and risk management of chemicals as products, the main tools in the EU are given by the Regulation 793/93 (Existing substances) and the Directives 92/32 (New substances) and 76/769 (Market and use limitation).
The appropriate forum for discussions concerning product phase-outs or restrictions which would involve considerable changes in the internal market, is under Directive 76/769.
In the context of this Directive, the Commission is now working on a proposal to limit some uses of chlorinated solvents.

The forthcoming Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive (IPPC) could help tackle several problem areas of the 'chlorine debate', such as the production of chlorine, propylene oxide, epoxy resins and the incineration of wastes.
This Directive provides adequate instruments for the systematic assessment of the production routes that should be adopted as BATs (Best Available Techniques).
By using rigorous BAT descriptions in future permitting procedures at EU level, the future evolution of the manufacturing technologies and capacities, that are related to chlorine production and use, will be helped to develop towards ecologically desirable solutions.

An early recognition of the trends for chlorine substitution is essential for analyses about the prospects and competitiveness of the European chemical industry.
Although it is yet unclear how much funding either governments or industry are prepared to commit to the chlorine-research effort, it seems that industry, besides its public-relations campaigns to assure people that chlorine compounds are safe, has started to study substitution options for a number of areas where there is growing evidence that society is not prepared to accept scientific uncertainty and risks.

[1] CHC: chlorinated hydrocarbons

[3] cumulative previsions for the period 1994-1999

[3] cumulative previsions for the period 1994-1999
