
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF CHROMOSOMES AND GENES

In the 1980s, remarkable progress was made in gaining knowledge of the structure and function of chromosomes and genes at the molecular level.
This came about chiefly through the discovery and the widespread application of recombinant DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) technology, which has provided the tools for a distinctive new approach to medical genetics and has already been usefully applied in many clinical situations.
In this chapter w e present an overview of the aspects of molecular genetics that are required for an understanding of the genetic approach to medicine.
This chapter is not intended to provide an extensive description of the wealth of new information about gene structure and regulation.
To supplement the information discussed in this chapter, Chapter 5 describes many experimental procedures of modern molecular genetics that are becoming critical to the practice and understanding of human and medical genetics.

ORGANIZATION OF THE HUMAN GENOME

The human genome, in its diploid form, consists of approximately 6 to 7 billion base pairs (or 6 to 7 million kilobase pairs (kb)) of DNA organized linearly into 23 pairs of chromosomes.
The genome contains, by current estimates, 50,000 to 100,000 genes (encoding, therefore, an equal number of proteins) that control all aspects of embryogenesis, development, growth, reproduction, and metabolism- essentially all aspects of what makes a human being a functional organism.
Thus the influence of genes and genetics on states of health and disease is widespread, and its roots are the information encoded in the DNA found in the human genome.
We understand the role of only a small percentage of the total number of genes.
Nonetheless, the general molecular and structural framework of the genome, of its chromosomes, and of its genes is becoming clear.
Analysis of the organization of the human genome is an area of considerable excitement in human and medical genetics today; it is anticipated that much, if not all, of the genetic information in the genome will in the near future be identified and examined at the molecular level as part of what has been called the Human Genome Project, an international effort to map and sequence the entire human genome. 

The characterization and understanding of 31 genes and their organization in the genome have an enormous impact on the understanding of physiological processes in the human organism in both health and disease, and consequently on the practice of medicine in general.
As Nobel laureate Paul Berg stated, «Just as our present knowledge and practice of medicine relies on a sophisticated knowledge of human anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry, so will dealing with disease in the future demand a detailed understanding of the molecular anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry of the human genome.
We shall need a more detailed knowledge of how human genes are organized and how they function and are regulated.
We shall also have to have physicians who are as conversant with the molecular anatomy and physiology of chromosomes and genes as the cardiac surgeon is with the structure and workings of the heart».

DNA Structure: A Brief Review

DNA is a polymeric nucleic acid macromolecule composed of three types of units: a five-carbon sugar, deoxyribose; a nitrogen-containing base; and a phosphate group (Fig. 3 -1). 
The bases are of two types, purines and pyrimidines. 
In DNA, there are two purine bases, adenine (A) and guanine (G), and two pyrimidines, thymine (T) and cytosine (C).
Nucleotides, each composed of a base, a phosphate, and a sugar moiety, polymerize into long polynucleotide chains by 5'-3'phosphodiester bonds formed between adjacent deoxyribose units (Fig. 3-2).
In the case of intact human chromosomes, these polynucleotide chains (in their double-helix form) can stretch hundreds of millions of nucleotides long.

The anatomical structure of DNA carries the chemical information that allows the exact transmission of genetic information from one cell to its daughter cells and from one generation to the next.
At the same time, the primary structure of DNA specifies the amino acid sequences of the polypeptide chains of proteins, as described later in this chapter.
DNA has special features that give it these properties.
The native state of DNA, as elucidated by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, is a double helix (Fig. 3-3).
The helical structure resembles a right-handed spiral staircase in which its two polynucleotide chains run in opposite directions, held together by hydrogen bonds between pairs of bases: A of one chain paired with T of the other, and G with C (Fig. 3-3).
Consequently, knowledge of the sequence of nucleotide bases on one strand automatically allows one to determine the sequence of bases on the other strand. 
Thus a double- stranded DNA molecule can replicate precisely by separation of the two strands and synthesis of two new complementary strands, in accordance with the sequence of the original template strands (Fig. 3-4).
Similarly, when necessary, the base complementarity allows efficient and correct repair of damaged DNA molecules.

Figure 3.1

The four bases of DNA and the general structure of a nucleotide in DNA

Each of the four bases bonds with deoxyribose and a phosphate group to form the corresponding nucleotides. 

Figure 3.2

A portion of a DNA polynucleotide chain, showing the 3'-5' phosphodiester bonds that link adjacent nucleotides

Figure 3.3

The structure of DNA 

On the left is a two-dimensional representation of the two complementary strands of DNA, showing the AT and GC base pairs.
Note that the orientation of the two strands is antiparallel.
On the right is the double-helix model of DNA, as proposed by Watson and Crick.
The horizontal «rungs» represent the paired bases.
The helix is said to be right-handed because the strand going from lower left to upper right crosses over the opposite strand. (Based on Watson JD, Crick FHC (1953) Molecular structure of nucleic acids-A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid.

Structure of Human Chromosomes

Each human chromosome is believed to consist of a single, continuous DNA double helix; that is, each chromosome is a long, linear double stranded DNA molecule.
(The only exception to this is the small circular mitochondrial chromosome, discussed later in this section.) In the human genome, these linear molecules range in size from approximately 5 0 million base pairs (for the smallest chromosome, chromosome 21) to 250 million base pairs (for the largest chromosome, chromosome 1).
Chromosomes are not naked DNA double helices, however.
The DNA molecule of a chromosome exists as a complex with a family of basic chromosomal proteins called histones and with a heterogeneous group of acidic, nonhistone proteins that are much less well characterized.

This complex of DNA and protein is called chromatin .
There are five major types of histones, termed xxx .
They play a critical role in the proper packaging of the chromatin fiber, as evidenced by the remarkable conservation of the amino acid sequences of xxx through evolution, even between species as diverse as chickens and humans. 
Two copies of each of these four histones constitute an octamer, around which a segment of DNA double helix winds, like thread around a spool (Fig. 3-5).
Approximately 140 base pairs of DNA are associated with each histone core, making just under two turns around the octamer.
After a short (20 to 60 base-pair) «spacer» segment of DNA, the next core DNA complex forms, and so on, giving chromatin the appearance of beads on a string.
Each complex of DNA with core histones is called a nucleosome , the basic structural unit of chromatin.
Histone H1, whose amino acid sequence varies more between species than do those of the core histones, appears to bind to DNA at the edge of each nucleosome, in the internucleosomal spacer region.
The amount of DNA associated with each unit of chromatin, including both the core nucleosome and the spacer region, is about 200 base pairs.

During the cell cycle, as described briefly in Chapter 2, chromosomes go through orderly stages of condensation and decondensation (Fig. 3-6).
In the interphase nucleus, chromosomes and chromatin are quite decondensed in relation to the highly condensed state of chromatin in metaphase.
Nonetheless, even in interphase chromosomes, DNA in chromatin is substantially more condensed than it would be as a native, protein free double helix.
Most if not all DNA in the nucleus interacts with histones to form nucleosomes.
At this stage, the DNA is condensed to about a tenth of its native length.
Thus, in more concrete terms, the DNA of human chromosome 1, which would be about 15 cm long as a naked double helix, is only about 1.5 cm long when complexed with chromosomal proteins.

The long strings of nucleosomes themselves are further compacted into a helical, secondary chromatin structure called a solenoid (see Fig. 3- 5), which appears under the electron microscope as a thick, 30-nm-diameter fiber (about three times thicker than the nucleosomal fiber).
This fiber appears to be the fundamental unit of chromatin organization. 
Each turn of the solenoid contains about six nucleosomes. 
Thus at this level of compaction in an interphase nucleus, the chromatin that makes up chromosome 1 is about 0.3 cm long. 
The solenoids are themselves packed into loops or domains attached at intervals of about 10 to 100 kb to a nonhistone protein scaffold or matrix. 
It has been speculated that loops are, in fact, functional units of DNA replication or gene transcription, or both, and that the attachment points of each loop are fixed along the chromosomal DNA.
Thus one level of control of gene expression may depend on how DNA and genes are packaged into chromosomes and on their association with chromosomal proteins in the packaging process; unlike the chromosomes seen in stained preparations under the microscope or in photographs, the chromosomes of living cells are fluid and dynamic structures.
The various hierarchical levels of packaging seen in an interphase chromosome are illustrated schematically in Figure 3-5.

The loops may be the beginning of the knob-like thickenings (called chromomeres ) observable under the microscope in early prophase chromosomes, as mitosis begins (see Fig. 3-6).
As chromosomes condense further, adjacent chromomeres merge into larger ones.
These clusters of chromomeres eventually become the dark-staining bands of G-banded prophase or metaphase chromosomes.
At prophase, chromosomes are easily visible under the light microscope.
As discussed in Chapter 2, 1000 or more bands can at this stage be recognized in stained chromosome preparations (high-resolution banding), and each band therefore contains several million base pairs of DNA (and, as described later, perhaps 50-100 genes).
At prophase, chromosome 1 has condensed to an overall length of about 50,um (condensed to about xxx of the length of a naked double helix).
When maximally condensed, at metaphase, DNA in chromosomes is about xxx of its native length. 
Therefore, each band recognized cytogenetically in metaphase preparations contains, on average, about 10 to 20 million base pairs of DNA.
After metaphase, as cells complete mitosis or meiosis, chromosomes decondense and return to their relaxed state as chromatin in the interphase nucleus, ready to begin the cycle again (Fig. 3-6).

The precise behavior of individual chromosomes during the cell cycle is determined by a number of functional elements that are critical for the correct expression, duplication, and segregation of chromosomes.
Among these, the most extensively characterized are origins of DNA replication, telomeres, and centromeres .
Telomeres and centromeres were introduced in Chapter 2.
We briefly discussed replication of a DNA double helix earlier (see Fig. 3-4).
The considerable length of a human chromosome (as with all eukaryotic chromosomes) requires that replication initiate at several thousand locations in order to complete synthesis of the entire molecule within the S phase of the cell cycle.
The points of initiation of DNA synthesis, called origins , may be specific DNA sequences located at intervals of several hundred kilobases along the length of a chromosome.

The enormous amount of DNA packaged into a metaphase chromosome can be appreciated when chromosomes are treated to remove most of the chromatin proteins in order to observe the protein scaffold (Fig. 3-7).
When DNA is released from chromosomes treated this way, long loops of DNA can be visualized, and the residual scaffolding can be seen to reproduce the outline of a typical metaphase chromosome.

Figure 3.4

Replication of a DNA double helix, resulting in two identical daughter molecules, each composed of one parental strand (black) and one newly synthesized strand (red)

Figure 3.5

Hierarchical levels of chromatin packaging in a human chromosome

Figure 3.6

Cycle of condensation and decondensation as a chromosome proceeds through the cell cycle

The Mitochondrial Chromosome 

Although the vast majority of genes are located in the nucleus, a small but important subset resides in the cytoplasm in the mitochondria.
Mitochondria] genes exhibit exclusively maternal inheritance (see Chapter 4).
All human cells have hundreds of mitochondria, each containing a number of copies of a small circular molecule, the mitochondrial chromosome.
The mitochondrial DNA molecule is only 16 kb in length (less than 0.03 percent of the length of the smallest nuclear chromosome) and encodes 13 key structural genes, as well as a number of structural ribonucleic acid (RNA) genes.
Mutations in mitochondrial genes have been demonstrated in several neuromuscular disorders, including the maternally transmitted Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (see Chapter 4).

Table 3.1

DNA in the Human Genome

Classes of DNA in the Human Genome

The organization of DNA in the human genome is far more complex than was foreseen even as recently as 1980.
Of the DNA in the genome, less than 10 percent actually encodes genes.
Only about three quarters of the total linear length of the genome consists of so-called single-copy or unique DNA -that is, DNA whose nucleotide sequence is represented only once (or at most a few times) per haploid genome.
The rest of the genome consists of several classes of repetitive DNA and includes DNA whose nucleotide sequence is repeated, either perfectly or with some variation, hundreds to millions of times in the genome. 
Whereas most (but not all) of the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes in the genome are represented in single-copy DNA, the repetitive DNA fraction is believed to play a role in maintaining chromosome structure or perhaps to play no essential role whatsoever (Table 3-1).

GENES IN POPULATIONS

Genetics is unique among the various disciplines in medicine because of its focus on a family rather than on an individual patient.
Medical genetics is concerned not only with making the correct diagnosis in a particular case but with determining the genotypes of other family members and estimating recurrence risks both for the parents of an affected person and for his or her sibs, as well as for more distant relatives.
Furthermore, because such risks are usually affected not only by the genotypes of directly related family members but also by the genotypes of persons from the general population who have married into the family, genetic counseling must take into account the likelihood of specific genotypes in different populations.
Thus in order both to make a genetically correct clinical diagnosis and to determine recurrence risks as part of effective genetic counseling, it often matters, for example, whether a family has its origins in the British Isles or in the Mediterranean or in Finland, whether there is a family history of consanguinity, or whether the family is Caucasian, Black, or Asian.
In genetics more than in any other medical specialty, the patient is a reflection of the population to which he or she belongs.

Population genetics is the study of the distribution of genes in populations and of how the frequencies of genes and genotypes are maintained or changed.
The theme of this chapter is that knowledge about the different disease genes that are common in different populations, and their effect or lack of effect on reproductive fitness, can be a valuable asset in clinical diagnosis and in genetic counseling.
Population genetics has much in common with epidemiology, the study of the interrelationships of the various genetic and environmental factors that determine the frequency and distribution of diseases in human communities.
The two areas fuse in the field of genetic epidemiology, which is chiefly concerned with diseases that have complex patterns of inheritance or are caused by a combination of heritable and environmental factors.
As described further in Chapter 15, this approach has already improved our understanding of the genetics of many diseases, especially the common disorders of adult life.

In this chapter we describe the underlying principle of population genetics, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium; we consider its assumptions and the factors that may cause true or apparent deviation from equilibrium in real as opposed to idealized populations; and we consider how to determine the frequencies and mutation rates of certain genes of clinical importance, both autosomal and X-linked.

HUMAN POPULATIONS

The human species of close to 5 billion members is divided into many distinguishable subpopulations, the largest of which are commonly called races .
Races are defined as major population groups whose gene pools differ from each other.
There are three major racial divisions, Caucasians, Blacks, and Asians, each of which has numerous genetically different subgroups.
Although the human chromosomes and the loci that they contain are identical in all members of the species, allele frequencies at many loci vary widely among population groups.
As discussed in the previous chapter, some variants are virtually restricted to members of a single group, although they are not necessarily present in all members of the group. 
More often, variant alleles have different frequencies in different populations.
Within each population there is extensive variation, greater on the average than the mean differences between groups.

The basis of the genetic differences among races and among their subpopulations is mutation.
The selection of favorable mutations in response to environmental conditions or the chance survival of specific neutral or even harmful mutations, together with a degree of reproductive isolation between the groups, allowed genetic differences between population groups to become established. 
In the most recent glacial period, 100,000 years or so ago, the Eurasian land mass, where small and scattered human settlements were developing, was divided into three distinct regions, separated by mountainous glaciated areas that were physical barriers to communication and interbreeding.
Within these regions, geographically and thus genetically isolated from one another, the three major racial groups are believed to have developed. 
Subsequently, each group subdivided further into numerous distinct subpopulations, often called ethnic groups , with their own characteristic sets of gene frequencies. 
There are often dramatic differences in allele frequencies between population groups, both for alleles that cause genetic disease and for presumably selectively neutral genetic markers, such as certain blood group and protein polymorphisms and some DNA polymorphisms (Tables 7-1 and 7-2).
Although the former are highly significant for determining recurrence risks for genetic diseases in specific population groups, the latter are important as markers of recent human evolution.

Table 7.1

Selected Examples of Disease Alleles With Different Frequencies in Different Populations

Allele/Disease.
Population Variation.


xxx ; allele of xxx -globin gene (sickle cell anemia) .
High in Africa, less common elsewhere.


xxx allele of xxx -globin gene.
High in West Africa specifically.


Cystic fibrosis .
High in European and U.S. Caucasian populations; low in Asian and African populations; low in Finland.


Tay-Sachs disease.
High frequency of several alleles in Ashkenazi Jews; low in most non-Ashkenazi populations.


Choroidermia.
Common in Finland; very rare elsewhere .


Myotonic dystrophy.
About 1 in 10,000-20,000 in most populations, but less than 1 in 1000 in parts of Quebec.


Table 7.2

Examples of Polymorphic Loci with Different Allele Frequencies in Different Populations

ABO blood group system.
Wide variation; e.g., B allele common in Asians but absent in American aboriginal populations (see Chapter 6).


Other blood group systems.
Wide variation in frequency of common alleles; some rare alleles show restricted distribution (Rh allele xxx found only in Africa; see Chapter 6).


xxx -antitrypsin.
Frequencies of three major M alleles vary between populations (e.g., xxx from 0.51 to 0.98; xxx from 0.00 to 0.20).


Alcohol dehydrogenase.
Three loci: xxx , Variant of xxx ; much more common in Japanese (90%) than in Europeans (15%).


Aldehyde dehydrogenase.
Deficiency of xxx ; in 50% of Asians, less than 5% of North American Indians.


HLA system.
Numerous alleles at each sublocus, wide variation in frequency (see Chapter 14).


Lactase activity.
Two major alleles, for high and low activity;Low activity after early childhood common in Africans and Asians (allele frequency xxx ), less common in Northern Europeans and U.S. Caucasians (allele frequency xxx ).


Apolipoprotein A-I levels.
Plasma concentration varies from xxx mg/dl and is correlated with risk of coronary heart disease; allele for low apoA-I level is common in Chinese, but less common in other populations.


PHENOTYPES, GENOTYPES, AND GENE FREQUENCIES

Although one requires knowledge of a person's genotype to accurately determine recurrence risks, in most instances it is only the phenotype that one can observe and directly measure. 
Thus there is a need to be able to use incidence figures for an inherited disease or other genetic trait to calculate individual allele frequencies.
To do this requires knowledge of genes in populations and their transmission from generation to generation.

Single-gene phenotypes, such as those introduced in Chapter 4, segregate sharply in families and, on average, tend to occur in fixed and predictable proportions.
A simple example of a common autosomal hereditary trait governed by a single pair of alleles can be used to illustrate the basic principles that underlie the inheritance of genes in populations.
Consider the MN blood group system (the glycophorins), in which a pair of codominantly expressed alleles, M and N, give rise to three genotypes, M/M, M/N, and N/N , and the three corresponding phenotypes, M, MN, and N (see Chapter 6).
As is clear from the principles of single-gene inheritance discussed in Chapter 4, a specific mating of an MN female and an MN male would result in three types of distinguishable offspring (M, MN, and N), in the expected proportions 1/4 M, 1/2 MN, and 1/4 N.

These same principles can be extended to matings within the population in general.
A sampling of individuals from a population provides absolute numbers of MN phenotypes (and thus genotypes) that can be converted into relative frequencies by dividing them all by the total number of observations.
Thus for a British population studied by Race and Sanger (1975): We use the observed relative frequencies to estimate the frequencies of the M and N alleles in this population because it is this estimate that is needed to make predictions about matings and their likely outcome.
On the basis of the observed phenotype and genotype frequencies, we can directly determine the gene frequencies, remembering that each autosomal genotype consists of two alleles.
In this example, then, the observed frequency of the M allele is ( xxx .

Similarly, one can calculate the frequency of N as 0.47, either by adding up the number of N alleles directly (1347 of a total of 2838 alleles) or simply by subtracting the frequency of M from 1 (therefore, the frequency of xxx , since the relative frequencies of the two alleles must add up to 1.

We have used this small sampling of individuals in a population to derive estimates of the relative frequency of the two alleles in the population as a whole.
In this context, when we refer to the population frequency of a gene (allele), we are considering a gene pool , which contains all of the alleles at a particular locus for the entire population. 
The likelihood of an individual's being of a particular genotype at the MN locus thus depends on the frequency of the M and N alleles in the gene pool.
If the relative frequencies of the two alleles in the gene pool are 0.53 (for M ) and 0.47 (for N ), then for the population from which this sampling of 1419 people was tested, the relative proportions of the three combinations of alleles (genotypes) are xxx (for drawing two M alleles from the pool), xxx (for two N alleles), and xxx (for one M and one N allele).

THE HARDY-WEINBERG LAW

Putting the above example in more general terms, if p is the frequency of one allele and q is the frequency of the other allele, then the frequencies of the three combinations of alleles will be: xxx An important consequence of the relationships among phenotype, genotype, and allele frequencies is that the proportions of the genotypes do not change from generation to generation.
In the generation that follows random mating of a population in which the genotypes M/M, M/N, and N/N are present in the proportions xxx , the genotypes appear in the same relative proportions (Table 7-3).

That genotypes are distributed in proportion to the frequencies of individual alleles in a population and remain constant from generation to generation is the basic tenet of the cornerstone of population genetics, the Hardy- Weinberg law .
This law was named for George Hardy, an English mathematician, and Wilhelm Weinberg, a German physician, who independently formulated this thesis in 1908.
It seemed surprising to some at that time that a dominant allele does not automatically increase in frequency until it replaces its recessive counterpart, or a deleterious recessive allele, such as that responsible for cystic fibrosis in Caucasian children (Chapter 4), does not automatically fall in frequency until it is eliminated altogether from a population.
The Hardy-Weinberg law explained the basis for the constant gene frequencies as an application of the binomial theorem.

Table 7.3

Frequencies of Mating Types and Offspring for a Population in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium with Parental Genotypes in the Proportion xxx 

The Binomial Distribution

The binomial distribution, originally discovered by Sir Isaac Newton, was given its first rigorous proof by Jakob Bernoulli, a mathematician.
In general terms, when there are two alternative events, one with probability p and the other with probability xxx , the frequencies of the possible combinations of p and q in a series of n trials are given by the expansion xxx .
We now examine a simple example that has some clinical relevance: the distribution of boys and girls in successive births.

We assume that both male and female births have a probability of xxx , even though the true probability of human male birth (p) is actually a little higher than xxx .
Then the distribution of sibships with 2 boys, 1 boy and 1 girl, and 2 girls in 2-child families is given by the expansion of the binomial xxx ; in 3-child families, by the expansion of xxx ; and so forth, where xxx .

Thus among 2-child sibships, xxx xxx of sibships contain 2 boys; xxx contain 1 boy and 1 girl; xxx contain 2 girls.

In 3-child sibships, xxx ; xxx of sibships contain 3 boys; xxx contain 2 boys and 1 girl; xxx contain 1 boy and 2 girls; xxx contain 3 girls.

Of course, regardless of the sex distribution of the preceding children in a sibship, each new sib has equal probabilities of being male or female.

Mathematicians may prefer to use the general term of the binomial expansion, which is xxx where n xxx number in series, xxx probability of a specified event, xxx probability of the alternative event, xxx number of times p occurs (i.e., the exponent of p ), and n! (n factorial) is xxx .

In this example, the values of p and q are each xxx , but the binomial distribution can be used for other values as well.
The same method is applied, for example, to give the distribution of a known autosomal recessive trait among the progeny of two heterozygous parents.
Here, the probability of one event (that a child is affected) is xxx , and the probability of the other event (that a child is unaffected) is xxx .
Thus the probability of having 1 affected child in a 5-child sibship is xxx .
Similarly, the probability of having 3 affected children can be calculated to be xxx , or approximately 9 percent.

Genetic Ratios

One of the important uses of the binomial distribution in population genetics is to determine whether a particular disorder whose pattern of inheritance has not been previously established is autosomal recessive, by examining whether its distribution in sibships fits the 25 percent expectation for autosomal recessive inheritance.
For example, assuming recessive inheritance, what proportion of 3-child families would have 0, 1, 2, and 3 affected children?
According to the approach used earlier, p (chance of clinically normal child) xxx (chance of affected child) xxx , and xxx , Thus the theoretical expectation, based on autosomal recessive inheritance, is that xxx of all such families have no affected child; xxx have 1 affected child; xxx have 2 affected children; xxx have 3 affected children. 

Bias of Ascertainment

We have determined the expected proportions of affected children in 3-child families of parents who are carriers for an autosomal recessive disorder.
As shown, if we ascertain a family only when it has at least 1 affected child, and if we ascertain all such families, then 27 of the 64 families at risk (42 percent) will be missed.
Of the 37 ascertained families, 27 (73 percent) have 1 affected child; 9 (24 percent) have 2 affected children; 1 (3 percent) have 3 affected children.

In the ascertained group, then, the total number of affected children among 111 children in 37 families is xxx or 43 percent, far above the theoretical 25 percent expected for autosomal recessive inheritance.
Where did we go wrong?

This is an example of bias of ascertainment , a bias to avoid in medical research, especially in medical genetics.
In tests for autosomal recessive inheritance, sibships with no affected members are inevitably missed, and depending on the mode of ascertainment, a sibship's chance of being ascertained may be higher when it has 2 or more affected members than when it has only 1.
A number of statistical methods to correct for bias under different conditions of ascertainment are known and are described in many statistics texts.
Bias of ascertainment is mentioned here chiefly because failure to recognize its importance can lead to serious errors.

Frequency of Autosomal Genes and Genotypes 

As we have seen, Hardy-Weinberg distributions of genotypes in populations are simply binomial distributions.
Symbols p and q represent the frequencies of two alternative alleles at a locus (where xxx ), and xxx , representing the pair of alleles at any autosomal locus or any X-linked locus in females. (Because males are unique in having only a single X chromosome, frequencies of X-linked genes in males are considered separately later.) If a locus has three alleles, p, q, and r , the genotypic distribution can be determined from xxx .
In general terms, the genotypic frequencies for any known number of alleles can be calculated binomially. 

In clinical genetics, by far the chief use of the Hardy-Weinberg law is for calculating gene and heterozygote frequencies when the frequency of a genetic trait is known, as was illustrated earlier in the case of a codominantly expressed trait for the MN locus.
A related application for determining the frequency of carriers of an autosomal recessive condition was demonstrated in Chapter 4 with reference to cystic fibrosis; further examples of the application of these calculations are given in Table 7-4, in which the gene frequencies and heterozygote frequencies of several disorders in high-incidence and low-incidence populations are compared.

Frequencies of autosomal dominant genes can also be estimated from incidence data.
Usually, homozygotes for autosomal dominant conditions a re so rare that for purposes of calculation they can be ignored (Table 7-5).
Because almost every patient is therefore a heterozygote with one normal and one abnormal allele, the frequency of the mutant allele (q) is approximately half the disease incidence ( 2pq , or about 2q , since p is very nearly 1).
The observed incidence of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), for example, is approximately xxx .
Therefore, we can calculate that the frequency of the mutant FH gene is half of this, or about 0.001 (Table 7-5).

Table 7.4

Incidence, Gene Frequency, and Heterozygote Frequency for Selected Autosomal Recessive Disorders in Different Populations

THE HUMAN GENE MAP:GENE MAPPING AND LINKAGE ANALYSIS

Geneticists working in many different organisms depend on the mapping of genes to establish the identity of genes controlling different traits.
Gene mapping in human and medical genetics has proven to be no exception to this pattern and has, in addition, paid a rich dividend in providing information of enormous practical value for biology and medicine.
As alluded to in earlier chapters, human gene mapping is one of the most rapidly expanding areas of study in medical genetics today.
This is largely due to the realization that gene mapping can provide a direct route for identifying genes responsible for genetic diseases. 
As applications of gene mapping information to disease diagnosis, gene isolation, and genetic counseling have become more widely appreciated, the impetus behind achievement of a complete human gene map-an encyclopedia of all of our genes and their associated genetic disorders-has gained strength.
Today, medical journals are full of reports assigning genetic diseases to particular chromosomes, and medical charts are full of laboratory reports in which genetic markers have been used to assist in providing accurate genetic counseling or diagnoses. 

There are two fundamentally different approaches for assembling gene maps of human chromosomes: physical mapping and genetic mapping. Physical mapping uses a variety of methods to assign genes to particular locations along a chromosome. 
With these methods, map positions are described in units that are a reflection of some physical measurement performed with somatic cells in the laboratory.
Genetic mapping , on the other hand, is the measurement of the tendency of two genes to segregate together through meiosis in family studies and thus is a description of a gene's meiotic behavior rather than its physical location.
In this chapter, we discuss both types of mapping and examine several of their applications for identifying and isolating particular human genes and for providing diagnostic information in medical genetics.

The Grow of Human Cell in Culture

Techniques for cell culture took a long time to develop and to become widely used, partly because of the strict nutritional requirements of cultured cells and partly because successful maintenance of a culture for long periods requires exacting precautions to avoid contamination by microorganisms, yeasts, or other cultured cell lines.
The nutritional requirements include the use of a semidefined medium with 5 to 15 percent fetal or newborn calf serum (containing largely unidentified growth factors), as well as glucose, amino acids, vitamins, minerals, salt, and a buffering system.

The kinds of cultures most frequently used in human and medical genetics, including gene mapping studies, include the following: Peripheral Lymphocytes in Short-Term Cultures .
These cells do not meet the requirement of long-term survival, persisting in culture for only about 72 hours.
Such short-term cultures are used extensively for chromosome analysis, as discussed in Chapter 2.

Fibroblasts .
Fibroblasts are among the most useful cell types for somatic cell genetic studies, including physical gene mapping.
They are cultured from small explants of skin or other tissue.
The cells, which have a characteristic spindle shape, grow in monolayers attached to a plastic or glass substratum and must be subcultured at frequent intervals because overcrowding leads to contact inhibition of growth.
Fibroblast cultures usually maintain the karyotype of the original cells (normal or abnormal), although clones of cells with somatically altered karyotypes arise in culture rarely. 

Fibroblast cultures senesce after about 30 to 100 generations in culture; the duration of survival in culture is longer for cell lines set up from young persons than for cell lines from older persons.
Fibroblasts cultured from patients with a suspected genetic disorder are a common source of metaphase chromosomes for cytogenetic analysis, of cell extracts for biochemical studies, and of DNA for molecular studies.
In addition, human fibroblasts are often used in somatic cell hybridization experiments for gene mapping.

Permanent Lines of Transformed Cells .
Some cell lines undergo transformation in culture and become capable of unlimited growth, either spontaneously or experimentally by viral infection; other permanent cell lines are established directly from tumors.
Such lines do not exhibit contact inhibition, do not senesce, and do not maintain a stable karyotype, but often exhibit characteristics of the type of transformed cell from which they were derived.
As such, they are quite useful for analysis of the genetic basis of transformation and malignancy.

Lymphoblast Cell Lines .
Although cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes do not ordinarily persist in culture, they can be induced to do so when transformed by the Epstein-Barr virus.
Lymphoblast cultures, derived from B-cell lineages, grow in suspension, rather than as an attached monolayer of cells, and do not senesce.
Thus they are an essentially permanent source of material from patients with genetic disorders.

Fetal Cell Lines .
Fetal cells can be obtained prenatally either by sampling amniotic fluid by amniocentesis or by chorionic villus sampling from a pregnant woman (see Chapter 19).
A proportion of fetal cells so obtained retain at least some growth potential in culture, although such cultures tend not to grow as well (or for as long) as skin fibroblasts.
Amniotic fluid cell or chorionic villus cultures are used for determining the fetal karyotype, for analysis of enzyme levels, and for DNA analysis to provide prenatal diagnosis. 

PHYSICAL MAPPING OF HUMAN GENES

The assignment of genes to particular human chromosomes initially relied exclusively on family studies in large pedigrees to ascertain the mode of inheritance.
X-linked traits could be assigned to the X chromosome because of their unique pattern of transmission.
In addition, as discussed later in this chapter, a few autosomal traits could be assigned to individual chromosomes because of the fortuitous discovery of their cotransmission through many meioses with other well-known autosomal genes.
This was a generally slow and painstaking business, however, until the discovery in the 1960s that mammalian chromosomes, and particularly human chromosomes, could be made to «segregate» in somatic cells in culture, not just in germ cells in family studies, thus establishing a so-called «parasexual» alternative for gene mapping.
Because of its central importance to the field of gene mapping, we first discuss the establishment and growth of cells in culture and then describe the specific applications of this approach to physical gene mapping.

Somatic Cell Genetics

Somatic cell genetics, in broad terms, is the study of gene organization, expression, and regulation in cultured cells of somatic origin.
As an approach to many problems in human and medical genetics, it has been remarkably successful since the 1960s.
Somatic cell genetics was originally seen as a way of investigating single-gene and chromosomal disorders in long-term culture in the laboratory rather than in living patients.
The approach has many obvious advantages.
If a cell line from a patient with a rare disorder or an unusual karyotype can be established when the patient is available, it can be frozen more or less permanently in liquid nitrogen and studied later by different groups of investigators at any convenient time, even decades after the demise of the patient.

The field of gene mapping has taken advantage of the ability of a number of different cell types to grow, sometimes indefinitely, in cell culture (see the box on p. 168).
Indeed, it is doubtful that many of the advances in gene mapping could have come about so quickly without the capability of culturing somatic cells.

Physical mapping of genes encompasses a variety of different methods, designed to provide mapping information of different types and different levels of resolution, ranging from an entire chromosome to the single base pair (Table 8-1).

Table 8.1

Approaches for Physical Gene Mapping

Somatic Cell Hybrids and Gene Mapping

One of the principal applications of somatic cell genetics to gene mapping involves the transfer of genetic material from a human cell to another type of cell in culture, a procedure called gene transfer .
The amount of transferred DNA may range from a short segment of chromosomal DNA to much of an entire genome.
Gene transfer is a well-known mechanism in bacterial, viral, and fungal genetics, and geneticists have long recognized that the frequency with which two genetic markers are transferred together can be used as a measure of their physical proximity in the donor genome.
Thus, not long after it became clear that human and other mammalian cells could be maintained in culture, human geneticists searched for ways to transfer human genes from one cell to another in the laboratory as a parasexual means of segregating different genes and their alleles.

The most widely used approach, developed in the 1960s, involves fusion of cells from different species to make interspecific somatic cell hybrids .
Cultured somatic cells growing as monolayers or in suspension, as well as living cells obtained directly from patients, can be fused by using either inactivated Sendai virus or polyethylene glycol.
These agents promote fusion of membranes from two types of cell, thus forming homokaryons (if two cells of the same type fuse) or heterokaryons (if two cells of different type fuse), in which two nuclei are maintained separately in the same cytoplasm (Fig.8-1). 
After mitosis and cell division, the two nuclear contents are mixed in a single «hybrid» nucleus.
Under appropriate selective culture conditions, the two parental cell types, as well as hybrids derived from homokaryons, are incapable of survival, thus selecting for growth of intercell hybrids. 
Although a number of selective schemes have been developed, one of the first and most commonly used involves selection in medium containing hypoxanthine, aminopterin, and thymidine (the so-called HAT medium).
Cells can grow in HAT medium only if they possess the enzyme hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl-transferase (HPRT), which utilizes hypoxanthine and guanine in DNA synthesis (see Fig. 12-2).
Cells deficient in HPRT activity (HPRT-) require de novo synthesis of purines for survival and cannot survive in HAT medium because aminopterin inhibits purine (as well as pyrimidine) biosynthesis. 

When HPRT- rodent cell lines (usually either mouse or hamster) are fused with HPRT+ human cells, only rodent/human somatic cell hybrids are capable of prolonged growth in HAT medium: the parental mouse or hamster line dies in HAT, and the parental human cells (depending on their source) are selected against by virtue of their lack of long-term growth potential (if peripheral leukocytes are used), their generally slow growth (if primary skin fibroblasts are used), or their fortuitous and characteristic sensitivity (in comparison with rodent cells) to the compound ouabain (Fig.8-1).

Somatic cell hybrids are originally polyploid, containing the full chromosome complement of both the rodent and human parental cells.
In time, however, many of the chromosomes of one of the species are lost because their continued presence is not required for hybrid survival.
Only the chromosome carrying the gene for a marker being selected (for example, the X chromosome, carrying the HPRT gene) is necessarily present in all cells, although, in general, at least a few other donor chromosomes also persist.
The basis for chromosome loss or retention is still unknown; the important characteristic of rodent/human somatic cell hybrids is that it is the human, not rodent, chromosomes that are preferentially lost, resulting in hybrid cells retaining different numbers and combinations of human chromosomes, as determined by a number of karyotyping techniques that distinguish between rodent and human chromosomes (Figs. 8 -1, 8 - 2).

This parasexual system of human chromosome segregation makes it possible to map any gene or DNA segment that can be distinguished between the species to a particular human chromosome. 
When the residual human chromosomes present in a panel of independent somatic cell hybrids are compared to the presence or absence of a particular human gene in the same series of hybrids, that human gene can be seen to correlate completely with the presence or absence of a specific chromosome.
In this way, for example, the presence or absence of the gene for hexosaminidase A (HEXA), mutations at which cause Tay-Sachs disease (see Chapters 4 and 12), could be shown to correlate with human chromosome 15 (Table 8-2).
All hybrids that retained a human chromosome 15 contained the human HEXA gene; all those that no longer had chromosome 15 did not contain human HEXA.
This perfect concordance was observed only for chromosome 15 and not for any other human chromosome, thus allowing assignment of the HEXA gene to chromosome 15.
In this type of analysis, the presence of a human gene can be monitored either by activity measurements (if the gene is expressed in somatic cell hybrids), by using electrophoresis to distinguish human from rodent cell activity, or, more commonly now, by DNA hybridization methods with the Southern blotting technique and restriction enzyme differences to distinguish the human gene from the rodent gene (Fig. 8-3). 
By using this type of concordance analysis in a panel of interspecific somatic cell hybrids, many hundreds of genes have been assigned to individual human chromosomes.
Genes that have been mapped to the same chromosome are said to be syntenic (literally, «on the same thread»), regardless of how close together or how far apart they lie on that chromosome.

Studies such as this using human/rodent hybrids allow assignment of a gene to a particular chromosome.
Additional resolution can be gained by the segregation in hybrids of structurally abnormal human chromosomes, of which many examples are described in Chapters 9 and 10.
If a particular gene cosegregates in a panel of rodent/human somatic cell hybrids with a deleted or translocated chromosome, then the gene can be localized to the portion of the chromosome retained in the hybrids.
Alternatively, if a gene is known to map to a particular chromosome but is absent from a hybrid containing a deleted or translocated copy of that chromosome, then the gene can be assigned to the portion of the chromosome that is missing.
Figure 8-4 depicts two structurally abnormal X chromosomes used in gene mapping to localize X-linked genes and DNA sequences to particular regions of the X chromosome. 
By examination of hybrids containing portions of these translocation chromosomes, the X chromosome could be divided into three intervals and different genes assigned to each.
Extension of this strategy and examination of increasingly smaller regions of the chromosome of interest in hybrids has made it possible to localize genes to even smaller regions.
Although this approach significantly improves the level of resolution of gene mapping, the chromosome regions defined are still quite large in comparison with the size of an aver-age gene.

Figure 8.1

Interspecific somatic cell hybridization scheme

After cell fusion, human/rodent somatic cell hybrid clones are selected in a selection system, such as HAT medium. 
These cell hybrids preferentially lose human chromosomes, which makes it possible to isolate hybrid clones containing different combinations of human chromosomes.
These clones can then be analyzed for the presence or absence of a particular human gene, thus allowing assignment of the gene to a specific human chromosome.

Figure 8.2

Metaphase chromosome spread from a mouse/human somatic cel1 hybrid

Human chromosomes can be identified by a detection method that specifically labels human but not mouse DNA.
This hybrid contains six human chromosomes, identified as chromosomes 13, 20 (two copies), and the X (three copies).

Table 8.2

Mapping a Human Gene by Using Somatic Cell Hybrids

Figure 8.3

Southern blot experiment to map the human HEXA gene to chromosome 15, in a series of mouse/human somatic cell hybrids

Only hybrids I, III, VI, VII, and VIII contain human HEXA sequences, which can be distinguished from the mouse gene sequences by different restriction sites in the gene in the two species.

Figure 8.4

Regional mapping of X-linked genes by analysis of X; autosome translocahon chromosomes in somatic cell hybrids

The reciprocal products of two different X; autosome translocations are segregated in somatic cell hybrid clones and can be analyzed for the presence or absence of genes from the human X chromosome.
The combined results allow regional localization of the three genes to different portions of the X, as indicated at the right.

Mapping by Gene Dosage

A conceptually related approach also takes advantage of structurally rearranged chromosomes for gene mapping but does not rely on having to first segregate the abnormal chromosomes into somatic cell hybrids.
This approach depends on detection of dosage differences in either gene products or the gene sequences themselves between patients' cell lines containing different numbers of copies of a particular gene.
Although this method requires very careful analysis and interpretation, it has been used to assign genes to or exclude them from a region involved in a duplication or deletion (see Chapter 9).
It was originally used to assign genes to chromosome 21 by detecting levels of enzyme activity in cell lines from patients with Down syndrome (three doses of chromosome 21) that were higher than levels in cell lines from chromosomally normal persons (two doses). 
At the DNA level, the dosage approach has been used increasingly to assign DNA markers to the X chromosome (by comparing DNA dosage in persons with one [i.e., a normal male karyotype] to five [i.e., a 49,XXXXX karyotype] X chromosomes) (Fig. 8-5) or to small regions of a particular chromosome (by examining collections of patients with partial trisomies [three copies] or monosomies [one copy]; see Chapter 9).

One of the most direct applications of mapping by gene dosage is the regional assignment of X-linked disease genes by examining males with cytogenetically detectable deletions of part of the X chromosome.
In one well-studied case, a boy (B.
B.) with no known history of any genetic disease presented with four normally distinct X-linked conditions: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), chronic granulomatous disease (CGD),retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and a rare red blood cell phenotype.
Careful cytogenetic analysis revealed a small but detectable deletion in band Xp21 (Fig. 8-6).
The coexistence of four single-gene disorders with the small chromosome deletion led to the conclusion that the genes for these four X-linked traits mapped to the deleted interval.

Extension of this type of analysis to other individuals simultaneously affected with multiple X-linked diseases has allowed the regional assignment of a number of genes in this region of the X chromosome (Fig. 8-6).
The case of B. B. turned out to be even more significant for medical genetics because (as described more fully later in this chapter) his deleted X chromosome was used directly to allow cloning of the genes for both DMD and CGD.
This provides yet another example of how recognition of the unusual in medicine-in this case, the occurrence of multiple genetic diseases in a single individual-can provide important new information about normal genes, their organization, and their function.

Figure 8.5

Examples of mapping by dosage analysis

DNA probe 1 used at the left can be mapped to the X chromosome because the intensity of hybridization appears to be a function of the number of Xs present in each DNA sample. 
DNA probe 2 shows the same intensity hybridization in lanes 1 to 3, but is missing from lane 4.
This locus maps to the Y chromosome.

Figure 8.6

Regional localization of X-linked genes in patients with X chromosome deletions

Correlation of the extent of the cytogenetic dele60n with the particular disorders present in each case allows fine mapping of the individual disease genes to particular regions on the X chromosome.
DMD = Duchenne muscular dystrophy, OTC = ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, CGD = chronic granulomatous disease, RP = retinitis pigmentosa, GKD = glycerol kinase deficiency, AHC = congenital adrenal hypoplasia.

Note: A panel of mouse/human somatic cell hybrids, each containing 2 to 13 human chromosomes, was used to test for the presence or absence of the human hexosaminidase A gene (HEXA) by means of Southern blotting of DNA prepared from the hybrids (see Fig. 8 - 3).
There is a perfect correlation between the presence or absence of HEXA and the presence or absence of J human chromosome 15.
For all other human chromosomes, there are hybrids that contain HEXA but are missing the chromosome, and there are hybrids that contain the chromosome but are missing HEXA.
Thus these results indicate that the HEXA gene must be on human chromosome 15.

The Human Genome Project

Human and medical geneticists have been identifying and mapping genes for decades.
However, a radical departure to the «map-as map-can» approach was proposed in 1986 by Dulbecco, who suggested that if scientists really wanted to understand the role of genes in cancer not to mention in genetic disorders in general all they had to do was sequence the entire 3 billion base pairs and find all the genes!
After much discussion and debate (some of which still rages), the Human Genome Project, an international effort to first map and eventually sequence all of the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes, was born. 
The initial emphasis of the project is on building both physical and genetic linkage maps of all 22 autosomes and the sex chromosomes and on assembling overlapping and contiguous collections of clones (called «contigs») covering each chromosome from telomere to telomere, in order to facilitate gene identification and isolation (Fig. 8-9).
In the United States, the project is headed by James D. Watson, who, along with Francis Crick, discovered the structure of the double helix in 1953.
The international effort is monitored by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO), which organizes a series of annual Human Gene Mapping Workshops to formally assemble and compare maps and to compile a list of all mapped human genes. 
An updated catalog is published annually (see General References) and maintained in a continually edited computer data base that tracks all of the current mapping data and makes it available electronically, together with information on human genetic disorders (On-Line Mendelian Inheritance in Man; OMIM ; accessible through the Genome Data Base at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; McKusick.

APPLICATIONS OF HUMAN GENE MAPPING 

There are three major applications of gene mapping to medical genetics: providing diagnostic information for genetic counseling, guiding efforts to clone genes responsible for genetic disease, and raising and testing hypotheses about the basis of particular genetic diseases.
In all three instances, the building of both physical and genetic maps is interdependent.
Genetic mapping is aided by the knowledge of the physical map position of polymorphic markers being used in linkage analysis.
Physical mapping efforts to finely localize a gene can be guided by the existence of specific meiotic crossovers, detected as part of linkage analyses.

Detection of Mutant Genes by Linkage Analysis

That a genetic linkage map could be used to diagnose genetic diseases even in the absence of any concrete information about the biochemical or molecular nature of the disorder is a classic genetic concept that has been appreciated for decades.
Despite the importance of this concept, however, linkage mapping has been widely accepted as being medically relevant only since the formulation of the idea that RFLPs could form the basis of a human genetic map.

As discussed in Chapter 11, Kan and Dozy (1978) were the first to apply a DNA polymorphism to clinical diagnosis; they used a polymorphism 3' of the xxx- globin gene to diagnose cases of sickle cell disease by linkage analysis.
Although the frequency of recombination between the polymorphic site and the site of the sickle cell mutation in the, xxx- globin gene was negligible, it is important to recognize that the linkage approach to mutation detection, even when one is using informative pol&bsol;7morphisms in the cloned gene that is responsible for a genetic defect, is indirect and carries a risk of recombination between the genetic marker and the actual mutation.
In most instances, this risk is probably very low.
Very large genes, such as the DMD gene, provide exceptions to this generalization because crossing over within the gene occurs at a detectable frequency.
In Figure 8-19 we illustrate the use of cloned genes as polymorphic markers for disease diagnosis, using as an example another defect at the xxx- globin locus, xxx- thalassemia, a common autosomal recessive condition that is described in detail in Chapter 11.
The examples illustrate, once again, the requirements that a genetic marker must be informative and that it must be possible to assign phase in order to perform linkage analysis.

The value of a genetic map for disease diagnosis is most apparent when a gene has been localized on a chromosome, but not yet cloned.
In this case, one has to rely on using one or more genetic markers that show detectable recombination with a disease locus.
We have already alluded to this approach in discussing the detection of linkage earlier in this chapter.
Diagnosis in this case is complicated by having to take into consideration the possibility of crossing over in meiosis; thus for a genetic marker that shows 5 percent recombination with a disease locus, the diagnosis carries a 5 percent chance of error, even when the marker is completely informative and the phase is known (Fig. 8-20).
The possibility of recombination can also complicate the determination of the phase, w hen the phase is inferred from a child rather than from the grandparental generation.
For example, in the family shown in Figure 8-21, a diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy (DM), a variable autosomal dominant condition, is possible with only 82 percent certainty in individual III-2 (see legend to Fig. 8-21), despite the fact that the linked genetic marker being used shows only 10 percent recombination with the DM mutation.
This is because phase information is provided by only the genotype of the affected child (III-1) in this family.

The accuracy of diagnosis by using genetically linked markers with an appreciable recombination frequency between the marker and the disease locus can be increased markedly by using two informative genetic markers that flank the disease gene.
In this instance, the chance of a misdiagnosis is reduced significantly, since misdiagnosis will result only if two crossovers occur, one on each side of the disease gene.
For example, for flanking markers that each show 10 percent recombination with a disease gene, diagnosis by genetic linkage will be 99 percent accurate (instead of 90 percent for a single marker).
The benefit of using flanking markers reinforces the value of an accurate genetic linkage map, with well-mapped markers of known order and distance.

Additional examples of the use of genetic linkage analysis for diagnosis of inherited disease are discussed in Chapters 18 and 19.

Figure 8.19

Examples of molecular diagnosis in xxx- thalessemia, with polymorphisms in the, xxx -globin locus

The chance of recombination between the polymorphic marker and the mutation is assumed to be negligible.
In family A, phase can be determined from the affected sibling, and a diagnosis of unaffected is possible.
In family B, phase cannot be determined completely; no diagnosis is possible, because the second child could be either affected (50 percent chance) or unaffected (50 percent chance).
In family C, phase cannot be determined completely, but it is possible to provide a diagnosis that the second child will be a heterozygous carrier.
In family D, no diagnosis is possible; the family is uninformative.

Figure 8.20

Example of molecular diagnosis by using genetic linkage with a polymorphic marker known to map a distance of about 5 cM from an X-linked disease locus

Pedigree is phase-known.
The mutant allele must be located on the X chromosome with the 4.0-kb allele at the marker locus.

Figure 8.21

Example of molecular diagnosis by using genetic linkage in a phase-unknown pedigree with a polymorphic marker known to map a distance of about 10 cM from the myotonic dystrophy (DM) locus

Phase in individual 11-2 can- not be determined from her parents because her affected father could have transmitted the mutant DM allele along with either the A or a allele at the marker locus.
The genotype of the affected child, III- I, suggests that the mother's phase is DM-a, but this conclusion is only 90 percent certain because there is a 10 percent chance that her phase is DM-A and that a crossover occurred in the meiosis when her daughter was conceived.
Thus the overall chance that 111-2 will be affected is 82 percent, calculated as (0.9 X 0.9) + (0.1 X 0.1) .

Mapping of Disease Genes by Linkage Analysis

The preceding section focused on the use of a genetic linkage map for providing diagnostic information when a disease gene is already known to be genetically linked to one or more markers. 
However, how were these linkage relationships discovered? 

The two essential requirements for mapping disease genes are, first, sufficient numbers of families to establish linkage and, second, adequate informative DNA markers.
As mentioned earlier, the second requirement can be met relatively easily now.
Finding suitable families can, however, be a challenge, particularly for rare disorders or for disorders in which affected persons die at a young age (and are thus unavailable for analysis). 
Two general approaches have been used (Fig. 8-22).
In one, a small number of very large families is ascertained and DNA is obtained from family members to be typed for DNA polymorphisms. 
The advantage of this approach is that all affected members of the pedigree are known to have the same genetic disease, caused by a mutation at a single locus.

The alternative approach is to collect a large number of somewhat smaller families.
This is easier to do for relatively common diseases, such as cystic fibrosis (Fig. 8-22), but it carries the risk that not all families may have the genetically identical disorder.
Genetic heterogeneity , exemplified by the situation in which identical clinical symptoms are caused by defects at two or more genetic loci, can confound genetic linkage analysis and give the impression that a marker is unlinked to a disease locus when in fact it may be linked, but only in a subset of the families analyzed.
This situation is illustrated later in the case of linkage in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.
In practice in human genetics, one can hope to find linkage only at a distance of approximately 20 cM or less because at longer distances one usually cannot find sufficient family material to establish significant evidence for linkage (a lod score greater than 3) compared to nonlinkage. 
Thus a polymorphic marker generally has to be within roughly 20 million base pairs of the disease gene of interest in order for linkage to be detected.
For an autosomal trait, this is less than 1 percent of the genome, and so one would predict that, on average, 100 or so well-spaced autosomal polymorphic markers would have to be scored in the family collection before a positive linkage result is found.
In fact, among the several dozen successful applications of this approach, the range is 12 RFLPs (for the most fortunate search) to over 200 (for the most difficult).
It should be clear that the situation is considerably easier for X-linked diseases because one already knows the chromosomal location of the gene.
Consequently, only polymorphic markers from the X chromosome need to be tested for linkage to the disease.

When one begins a search for linkage, the expectation for any given polymorphic marker is that, by chance, it will not be linked to the disease gene (in fact, by chance, it is not even likely to be on the same chromosome as the disease gene). 
Thus it may take only a few informative meioses to establish that the polymorphism is not close to the gene of interest.
When a marker shows suggestive evidence of linkage (a combined maximum lod score of between 2 and 3, for instance), the search can be aided by knowing where the potential marker locus maps physically.
If, for example, the marker maps to a position on the long arm of chromosome 7, then one can focus attention on other polymorphic markers in that region to efficiently confirm or reject the suggested linkage result.
It is at this point that the extensive physical and genetic maps of each human chromosome become extremely valuable.
Once a suspected linkage result is confirmed, one can then test other markers known to map close to the one found, in an attempt to move closer and closer to the gene of interest.
Once one or more markers are found within about 5 cM of the disease gene, they can be used for diagnostic purposes, as illustrated in previous sections. 
They can also serve as starting points for fine mapping studies, to attempt to isolate the disease gene.

Human Gene Mapping and «Positional Cloning»

The application of gene mapping to medical genetics has met with spectacular success in some instances.
The overall strategy mapping the location of a disease gene by linkage analysis to define markers for use in disease diagnosis and genetic counseling, followed by attempts to clone the gene based on its map position can best be illustrated by specific examples.
The examples to be discussed illustrate several approaches; the one that is ultimately successful for a given disease depends on the unique characteristics and circumstances of that disease.

The approach of cloning a gene on the basis of its map position can be called positional cloning , to distinguish it from the more typical strategy for gene cloning, in which one begins with a known protein, determines its amino acid sequence, and uses that information to isolate the gene (see Chapter 5).
Positional cloning relies only on the chromosomal location of the gene.
This strategy has in the past been called «reverse genetics».
However, in fact, this approach is firmly rooted in the traditions of classical genetics.

Figure 8.22

Two approaches for collecting families for linkage analysis

The successful linkage of Huntington disease to a polymorphic marker on chromosome 4 relied in large part on a single large Venezuelan pedigree, a small part of which is shown in A.
The successful linkage of cystic fibrosis to a polymorphic marker on chromosome 7, however, relied on a collection of many smaller families, some of which are shown in B.
