
Catalunya Savings Bank

History

Economic Evolution

On 30 June 1926, the County Council included the sum of 50,000 pesetas in its budget, which represented the founding capital (endowment fund) to set up the Caixa, whose finality was to attract resources for investment mainly in loans, a securities portfolio and real estate, maintaining available liquid assets.

The aim was to contribute to the development of the province's agricultural, industrial and commercial interests.

As of 1953 the Caixa began to develop, taking full advantage of a legislation which slowly but surely was beginning to downplay its marked level of interventionism.

In 1962, the Law for the Bases of Ordering of Credit and Banking, which laid down new functions and operations for savings banks, marked the beginning of the road towards the operational balancing between savings banks and banks, a process which culminated at the end of 1988 in the publication of the Decree which derogated the regime which limited the expansion of savings banks outside the territory of their autonomous community of origin.

In the second half of the seventies, the Caixa gradually became a modern financial organisation operating in a competitive market with a broad range of financial instruments.
This positive dynamic was fostered by the parallel process of the liberalisation of the Spanish financial system and by the progressive approximation, from an operative standpoint, of banks and savings banks.

The Caixa de Catalunya has some 2 billion pesetas in assets and an extensive network of sales points, comprising nearly 700 offices (over 600 in Catalonia, with the others located in the Community of Madrid, the Community of Valencia, the Balearic Community, Aragón, Andalucía, la Rioja, Navarra and Murcia, plus 2 in France), complemented by a potent network of 800 automatic tellers.
Similarly, at the end of 1994 it had a workforce of over 3,500 employees.

Regarding the financial group of the Caixa de Catalunya, created to offer its clients a bigger and better integrated offer of financial and parafinancial products and services, it is comprised, together with the Caixa, of two banks (Banco de la Exportación, with head offices in Valencia, and the Banca Privada de Andorra), an investment funds manager (Caixa Catalunya Gestió), a pension schemes manager (Gescat), an insurance holding made up of three companies (Multinacional Aseguradora, Ascat-Vida and Ascat-Previsión), a portfolio company (Invercartera), a leasing company (Liscat), a factoring company (Factorcat), a securities agency (Valorcat), a general services company (Servicat), a security company (Segurcat), two real-estate development companies (Procat and Procam) and a commercial distribution company (Barnasud).

Finally, regarding the annual contribution it makes to culture, teaching, health, assistance and research in the country through its Social Work, in 1994 the Caixa de Catalunya allocated more than 3,000 million pesetas to maintaining its important network of over 120 social utilities (including more than 50 clubs for retired people, 33 reading rooms and 13 cultural centres) and to granting aids and subsidies to other public and private organisations and institutions for conducting cultural, educational and health activities of a markedly social character.

Products - Savings and Investment - Investment products 

Investment funds

These are investment products in variable or mixed fixed-income securities and stocks by means of the subscription in shares.
Liquidity is immediate and profitability depends on risk.
The funds commercialised by the Caixa de Catalunya can be either Spanish or foreign:

Spanish Investment Funds 

Foreign Investment Funds 

Investment for 2 years DINER FIAMM

Investment for 2 years FORECAST FIM GLOBAL FIM INTERNACIONAL FIM

FONCLIQUET GT EUROPE FUNDGT INVEST FUNDGT US SMALL C.F.GT DEUSTSC.FUND

Products - Savings and Investment - Products in pesetas 

Total book

Current account with chequebook with numerous advantages for holders.

- Besides the conduct of normal current account operations, if determined balances are maintained (as of 250,000 Ptas.), interests similar to those of savings books are received (Standard rate).
- Immediate availability.
- Easy to make payments to third parties, since a cheque book is provided.
- Operations are contained in one pass-book which also works on the automatic teller network.
- Access to Caixa de Catalunya services.
- Discounts on travel and shows.
- Insurance coverage (emergency home service, emergency travel service) for the holders.
- Immediate credit.

