
New CPUs Signal Better Multimedia PCs

Talk about strange bedfellows.
Former blood enemies Intel (Santa Clara, CA) and Advanced Micro Devices (Sunnyvale, CA) have signed a landmark cross-licensing agreement that will allow them to introduce CPUs with new multimedia x86 instructions by the end of this year.
Frozen out, however, is Cyrix (Richardson, TX) and its manufacturing partner, IBM Microelectronics (Fishkill, NY).

The surprising detente between the two leading x86 vendors could be the most significant step in the evolution of the x86 since Intel introduced the 32-bit 386 in 1985.
Intel and AMD plan to make new x86 chips that recognize the same set of extended instructions for multimedia tasks.
This technology, known as MMx, is supposed to dramatically improve the ability of x86 chips to process audio, video, and other multimedia data types.

The cross-licensing agreement ensures that Intel's and AMD's multimedia processors will be fully compatible with each other.
Without the deal, each company might have introduced its own proprietary extensions.
That would have forced software developers to support only one company's new instructions (most likely Intel's) or everybody's new instructions--a wasteful and potentially chaotic situation for both developers and users.

Two things are surprising about this agreement.
First, it comes only months after Intel and AMD concluded a bitter five-year legal battle over microcode copyrights.
All those differences are now settled.
Second, the agreement leaves Cyrix out on a limb.
Cyrix has been working on its own multimedia extensions, but they won't be compatible with Intel's and AMD's unless Cyrix either licenses or reverse-engineers the same technology.

At this writing, there is no indication from either Intel or Cyrix that a licensing deal is pending.
If Cyrix must resort to reverse engineering, the extra effort could seriously delay Cyrix's multimedia CPUs.
IBM suffers, too, because IBM licenses its latest x86 designs from Cyrix.
But according to Steve Tobak, vice president of corporate marketing for Cyrix, reverse engineering may not be necessary.
