
The New Genetic Medicines

Synthetic strands of DNA are being developed as drugs. 
Called antisense and triplex agents, they can potentially attack viruses and cancers without harming healthy tissue.

To someone interested in curing a disease, nothing would be more gratifying than discovering a «magic bullet» drug able to reverse the illness without producing side effects. 
For most of the 20th century, researchers hoping to find magic bullets thought in terms of agents able to combine with the active sites of proteins that contribute to disease.
By filling these active sites, which differ from one protein to another, the drugs would presumably inhibit the activity of the targeted proteins but would not interfere with needed ones. 

Work on proteins is ongoing.
Recently, however, a number of investigators have turned their attention to an exciting new class of targets.
Following what are known as the triplex and antisense strategies, those researchers are attempting to design drugs that will bind to selected sites on the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) that direct the synthesis of disease-related proteins.

The rationale is straightforward.
For a protein to be made, the unique gene that specifies its composition must be expressed.
That is, the gene must be transcribed, or copied, from doublestrand DNA into individual molecules of single-strand messenger RNA.
Then the RNA molecules must be translated into the specified protein.

Investigators hope the new drugs, by attaching to chosen segments of DNA (in the triplex approach) or messenger RNA (in the antisense approach), will impede transcription or translation of selected genes-be they microbial genes or aberrant forms of human varieties.
In so doing, the compounds will not merely disable deleterious proteins, they will prevent them from being made at all.

The nucleic acid binding agents receiving the most study are DNA oligonucleotides, or oligomers:
short strings of the nucleotides that constitute the building blocks of DNA. 
Such oligomers are the agents of choice in part because nucleic acids combine with one another according to well-understood rules.
As a consequence, the compounds can be designed to recognize a unique site on a chosen gene or on its messenger RNA transcripts.
They therefore have the potential to achieve the specificity required of a magic bullet.

A number of obstacles to the routine use of triplex and antisense therapies remain.
Still, there is good reason for enthusiasm.
Indeed, several oligonucleotide drugs have already demonstrated enough promise to justify clinical trials.
They are being tested in patients suffering from leukemia, AIDS and other diseases in need of improved treatments. 

Because oligonucleotide drugs are essentially snippets of genetic material, they are often referred to as genetic therapies. 
We should note, though, that such treatments differ markedly from standard gene therapies.
Most gene therapies provide full, healthy genes as substitutes for versions that are missing or unable to direct adequate synthesis of a needed protein.
Oligonucleotides cannot give rise to proteins.
Their virtue lies in their ability to block the expression of existing genes.

Use of an oligonucleotide to stall transcription is known as the triplex strategy simply because the oligomer winds around double-helical DNA, forming a three-strand helix.
The logic behind calling the translation-blocking strategy «antisense» is less apparent.
But it can be grasped easily if one knows a bit about the structure of RNA and the way one RNA molecule combines with another or with DNA.

RNA molecules are strings of nucleotides.
These nucleotides consist of the sugar ribose, a phosphate group (PO4)and any of four nitrogen-containing bases - adenine ( A ), guanine ( G ), cytosine ( C ) and uracil ( U ). 
(DNA nucleotides are similar, except that the sugar is deoxyribose and the base thymine, T , takes the place of uracil).

When RNA or DNA nucleotides are assembled into a single string, the sugar and phosphate groups become the backbone of the resulting strand, and the bases protrude from that backbone. 
As James D. Watson and Francis Crick showed for DNA in 1953, two nucleic acids combine into a double-strand structure by forming hydrogen bonds between their bases; adenine on one strand combines with thymine or uracil on the other strand, and guanine combines with cytosine.

Hence, if one strand of RNA consisted of the sequence xxx , it could pair with a second string of nucleotides having the complementary sequence xxx in the case of RNA; xxx in the case of DNA.

Because the sequence of bases along a messenger RNA molecule spells out the series of amino acids that must be strung together to make a protein (in other words, carries information needed by a cell), the sequence is said to make sense.
To produce a molecule able to bind to the sense strand, one must construct a string of nucleotides having the complementary, «antisense», sequence.
So it is that the practice of inhibiting translation with oligonucleotides is called the antisense strategy.

Antisense oligonucleotides are the first of the new genetic medicines to have reached clinical trials.
One of the initial clues that they could have therapeutic merit emerged in the early 1980s, when scientists discovered that certain microbes, in addition to making messenger RNA, naturally produce antisense RNA.
The most logical explanation for this behavior seemed to be that the organisms used antisense molecules as a previously unrecognized tool for regulating gene expression.
If the antisense RNA paired with its complementary messenger RNA molecule, it would presumably interfere with the ability of the organisms translation machinery to act on the sense strand and produce the specified protein.

It is now clear that plant and animal cells, in common with microbes, sometimes employ the antisense strategy to control gene expression.

But back then, workers were still trying to find out whether their hypothesis was correct.
With the help of recombinant-DNA technology, they created genes that would give rise to antisense versions of selected messenger RNA species.
Then they put the genes into cells.

Sure enough, the procedure sometimes led to dampened manufacture of proteins coded for by the targeted RNA strands.

The results suggested that antisense molecules could be designed to serve as drugs that would selectively impede translation. 
For broadest application, however, the drugs would have to be delivered to cells in the body easily and efficiently. 
That is, in most cases the best approach would be to administer short strings of synthetic antisense nucleotides instead of entire, cumbersome genes-although some researchers continue to work with antisense genes.

By the mid-1980s tools for readily synthesizing DNA oligonucleotides had become available, but whether the oligomers could be enlisted as drugs was another question.
Some years before-in 1978-Paul C., Zamecnik of the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology and Mary L., Stephenson of Harvard University had laboriously constructed a 13-nucleotide oligomer designed to recognize a base sequence in many messenger RNA molecules made by the Rous sarcoma virus.
This oligomer reduced replication of the virus in cells, indicating that it had blocked production of proteins needed for elaborating new viral particles.
Nevertheless, two potential problems worried investigators.

First, unmodified oligonucleotides carry a negative charge on each phosphate group.
Charged molecules often have difficulty diffusing across the uncharged membranes of cells. 
Hence, most researchers assumed that the multicharged oligomers would be unable to enter cells efficiently.
Second, cells abound in enzymes that cleave foreign DNA; it was thought likely that oligomers that managed to enter cells would, in most cases, be degraded promptly.

To address these drawbacks, Paul O., P., Tso and Paul S., Miller and their associates at Johns Hopkins University explored the value of modifying standard oligonucleotides.
As part of that effort, they replaced an oxygen atom in each phosphate group with a methyl group (CH3).
In so doing, they converted the negatively charged phosphates into noncharged units known as methylphosphonates.
This step helped to increase the cellular uptake of oligonucleotides and enabled them to resist being broken down by enzymes.
Regrettably, eliminating the charges on oligomers renders them hydrophobic (water-hating) and thus rather insoluble in aqueous solutions.
Lack of solubility can make mass production difficult.
Kazuo Shinozukaand Gerald Zon of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, working with one of us (Cohen), then at the National Cancer Institute, later introduced an alternative to the methylphosphonate oligonucleotides. 

They exchanged an oxygen atom in normal phosphate groups with a negatively charged sulfur atom.
These phosphorothioate oligomers -better known as «S-oligos»- are water soluble, easy to produce automatically and resistant to enzymatic breakdown. 
Perhaps for these reasons, most antisense drug research today employs the S-oligos.

Ironically, it is now apparent that cells take up S-oligos and unmodified oligonucleotides more easily than was originally thought.

These charged agents seem to enter cells not only by direct diffusion across the cell membrane but by endocytosis as well. 
In this process the cell membrane engulfs the compounds and then folds in on itself, giving rise to a small vesicle that is subsequently drawn into the cytoplasm.
What is less clear is whether the contents of such endosomes are released readily.

In addition to lowering some of the initial barriers to the therapeutic uses of antisense oligonucleotides, investigations conducted over the past 15 years have revealed a number of other important factors that must be taken into account in designing antisense drugs.
For instance, oligomers must be at least 15 nucleotides long in order to bind tightly to target sites and avoid associating with nontarget sites.
Related analyses have also established that antisense oligonucleotides can stall translation by at least two methods.
As predicted, they interfere with the ability of cells to «read» sense RNA.
In addition, by binding to messenger RNA, they can stimulate an enzyme (ribonuclease H) to cleave, and thereby destroy, the bound messenger RNA.

The collected findings fuel confidence that the antisense strategy holds promise for therapy.
¿But can antisense DNA in fact retard production of proteins known to be involved in diseases?
Experiments on cells in culture and preliminary data from human trials suggest they can.
(To our knowledge, the clinical trials are all using S- oligos.)
Significantly, early reports from animal studies conducted in several laboratories also indicate that antisense agents exhibit little or no toxicity. 
This is welcome news because in cultured cells S-oligos often bind to proteins or other unintended targets.
At times, these nonspecific interactions actually augment the direct inhibition of translation.
But there is always a concern that they could have unwanted consequences.

The first antisense oligomers to reach the market will probably be applied to combat viral infections.
ISIS Pharmaceuticals in Carlsbad, Calif., is conducting a large-scale clinical trial of an oligonucleotide targeted to transcripts of a viral gene important for replication of the human papillomavirus.
This virus is a cause of genital warts.
Such growths have reportedly disappeared or become smaller in many patients who have received injections into the skin under the warts.

A more preliminary clinical trial is under way in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ), the cause of AIDS.
Scientists at the National Agency for AIDS Research in France, Hybridon in Worcester, Mass., and elsewhere are evaluating an oligomer directed against the RNA product of the HIV gag gene, which the virus requires in order to replicate.

Clinical trials of cancer-fighting oligonucleotides are beginning, too.
One of these tests is being carried out in patients afflicted with acute myelogenous leukemia, a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood.
In the experiment, a group at the Nebraska University Medical Center is collaborating with scientists at Lynx Therapeutics in Hayward, Calif., to examine the ability of an antisense oligonucleotide to destroy cancer cells in the body and in a procedure known as ex vivo bone marrow purging.
In the latter approach, physicians remove bone marrow from a patient and treat it with an agent that selectively kills cancerous cells.
Then, after administering chemotherapy to the patient, they return the «purged» cells to the body.
The oligomer in this study is targeted to RNA generated by the p53 gene.
This gene is usually considered to be a tumor suppressor, but it is apparently overexpressed in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia.

Lynx is simultaneously collaborating with Alan M., Gewirtz of the University of Pennsylvania in analyzing an antisense drug for treating chronic myelogenous leukemia. 
This trial, which is again evaluating the ability of an antisense drug to eliminate cancer cells during ex vivo bone marrow purging, targets messenger RNA transcribed from a gene called c-myb .
In its healthy state, c-myb promotes the normal proliferation of blood cells.
Abnormal regulation of the gene has been implicated in causing human leukemias and other diseases.
Gewirtz is also beginning to test the efficacy of infusing the antisense agent into leukemic patients directly.

Clinical trials are under way or planned against additional viruses and cancer-related genes.
Even if the results are positive, in the long run antisense agents will probably be administered with other anticancer or antiviral drugs.
Two or more compounds that operate by different mechanisms are likely to prove more effective than any single agent administered alone.

As might be expected of any emerging technology, many difficulties still have to be resolved before the full promise of the antisense strategy can be realized.
For one thing, oligonucleotides are expensive to produce (although costs are dropping).
The stability of the compounds must be improved.
And workers interested in employing oligonucleotides as drugs must find better methods for delivering them to cells in quantity. 
The triplex research we discuss below shares these same concerns.

Potency needs to be enhanced as well.
To this end, some investigators are attaching RNA-degrading agents to the molecules.
In another approach, Claude Hélène and his colleagues at the National Museum of Natural History in Paris have made oligomers that carry chemical groups able to insert themselves between successive bases pairs on the RNA-DNA duplex; such intercalation should stabilize binding and prolong antisense activity.
Cohens group and others are using molecular modeling to design oligonucleotides with novel backbone structures, in the hope of improving both potency and specificity. 

Meanwhile a very different antisense approach is making impressive headway.
RNA molecules known as ribozymes are deployed instead of DNA oligonucleotides.
These molecules recognize specific base sequences in messenger RNA and cut the RNA at those sites, thereby destroying the transcripts.
In the next few months Flossie WongStaal of the University of California at San Diego expects to start a clinical trial of a ribozyme targeted to the RNA transcripts of a gene in HIV .

The other new genetic strategy-the triplex approach-has received less attention until recently, but intimations of its possibilities emerged in the 1950s.
Four years after Watson and Crick discovered the structure of double-helical DNA, Gary Felsenfeld and Alexander Rich, then postdoctoral fellows at the National Institutes of Health, began conducting their own explorations of multiple-strand structures formed by nucleic acids.
They synthesized RNA polymers of uracilcontaining nucleotides and mixed them with complementary strands-synthetic polymers of adenine-containing nucleotides.

Predictably, they were able to retrieve AU double helices.
To their surprise, they also found UAU triple helices, in which an additional strand of uracil-containing nucleotides bound to the AU double helix.

Subsequently, Michael J., Chamberlin and his colleagues at the University of California at Berkeley showed that the corresponding DNA polymers, consisting exclusively of thymine or of adenine nucleotides, could be assembled into TAT triple helices.
And Richard A., Morgan and Robert D., Wells, then at the University of Wisconsin, produced yet another kind of all-DNA triple helix.
They established that a string of cytosine nucleotides could bind to a GC double helix.
In this case, the triple helix arose only when the molecules were placed in a slightly acidic solution, in which protons were abundant.
The acidity was needed because the triple helix could form only if the extra cytosine-bearing strand acquired an additional proton.
The resulting structure is known as a xxx triplex.

For about a decade, the various triplexes seemed little more than intriguing curiosities, without obvious significance for the design of agents able to regulate native genes in cells. 
After all, the genes of living organisms are not fashioned from simple «homo» polymers, carrying one, endlessly repeated, nucleotide.
If triple-helix-forming nucleic acids were to be put to practical use, they would have to be able to recognize genes whose strands carried more than one kind of base pair.

In the late 1960s Morgan and Wells established that triple helices containing TAT and xxx units could be formed by combining an oligomer containing thymine and cytosine with a double helix containing AT and GC base pairs.
They thus produced the first strong indication that triple-helix formation might well be able to occur on natural genes, not solely on simple synthetic double helices.
Unfortunately, the tools needed to pursue this notion were not yet available.
For instance, the technology for cloning genes and synthesizing DNA oligonucleotides automatically had not yet been invented.

By the late 1980s, though, these problems were history. 
Furthermore, investigators had learned a great deal about how gene transcription is regulated.
They discovered that genes basically consist of two elements:
one is a regulatory region that controls the rate of transcription; the other is a coding region that specifies the amino acid sequence of the corresponding protein.
Genes are transcribed when proteins known as transcription factors bind to specific sites on the control region.
After such binding occurs, an enzyme known as RNA polymerase attaches to the coding region and produces messenger RNA copies of the information stored in that region. 
The coding segments of genes are usually covered with protective proteins and are inaccessible to drugs, but parts of the regulatory, or control, regions are often significantly more accessible.

These insights suggested that researchers would be well advised to concentrate effort on designing oligonucleotides that would bind to the control region of a chosen gene, thus keeping transcription factors from initiating transcription.
But first, scientists needed more evidence that synthetic oligonucleotides could recognize selected base-pair sequences on natural genes. 

Such proof came in 1987.
Peter B., Dervan of the California Institute of Technology and Hélène separately confirmed what Morgan and Wells had earlier shown with synthetic strands of double-helical DNA.
Under certain conditions, natural genes that contained sites rich in AT and GC base pairs could indeed combine with an oligonucleotide designed to form TAT and xxx triplets.
In these experiments the triplexes arose when one strand of the targeted DNA duplex carried mainly purine bases (adenine and guanine), leaving the pyrimidine bases (thymine and cytosine) for the other strand.
It is now evident that the oligonucleotides studied to date typically bind to just one strand of the double helix and only to the purine bases on that strand.

Dervans and Hélène's findings were tantalizing.

Yet a serious roadblock to therapeutic application of the triplex strategy persisted.
As was expected from the results of Morgan and Wells, their triplexes did not appear at physiological levels of pH; they arose only when the solutions were acidic.

Dervan was able to bypass the problem partially by adding an iodine atom or a methyl group to standard oligonucleotides. 

In 1988 one of us (Hogan)and his collaborators at Princeton University succeeded with a different approach-one that also increased the affinity of oligonucleotides for their targets and generated a new variety of triplex.
They determined that the need for an acidic pH level could be eliminated by inserting guanine-containing nucleotides where cytosines had previously been placed in triplex-forming oligonucleotides.
These revised oligomers generated xxx triplets instead of the xxx kind.
The guanine in the synthetic strand connects with the guanine in the double-strand DNA.

Hogans team and others later showed that oligonucleotides built to form TAT and xxx triplets on the regulatory regions of genes sometimes bound about as tightly as the proteins that normally recognize those sites.
This similarity fanned rising expectations that oligonucleotide drugs could be constructed to prevent genes from being bound by regulatory proteins.

To create triplex drugs, designers have to understand exactly how a given oligonucleotide will interact with its target.
They now know that triplexforming oligonucleotides do not interfere with the hydrogen bonds that hold the original double helix together. 
Rather each base in the oligonucleotide establishes two new hydrogen bonds with a purine base in the targeted region of the duplex.
It turns out as well that some oligonucleotides orient parallel, and some antiparallel, to their targets.

DNA strands are asymmetrical.
One tip is designated as the xxx end and the other as the xxx end.
In a classic double helix the strands are antiparallel:
the xxx terminal of one strand lies next to the xxx terminal of the other strand.

Oligonucleotides that contain cytosine and thymine tend to lie parallel to the purine-rich strand of the duplex target. 

Those containing guanine and thymine tend to be antiparallel. 
If these differences are not taken into account, an oligonucleotide will fail to recognize its DNA target.

In 1988 Edith H., Postel and Michael Cooney in Hogans laboratory, working with the cancer-related c-myc gene, provided the first evidence that an oligomer designed to make a triple helix on the control region of a gene could inhibit initiation of messenger RNA synthesis.
They did it in a cell-free transcription assay:
the gene and the oligonucleotide were mixed together with various cell components in a test tube instead of in an intact cell.

Subsequently, Dervan showed, again in a cell-free system, that triplex formation can prevent transcription of selected viral genes.

Equally promising results have been obtained for other genes.
Thus, it is now well accepted that, at least in the test tube, triplex-forming oligonucleotides can be designed with the ability to home to the control region of a chosen gene and selectively block its transcription into messenger RNA.
Recent evidence also indicates that triplex agents targeted to the coding regions of genes can interrupt RNA polymerases efforts to construct messenger RNA transcripts.
This discovery implies that when initiation of transcription cannot be prevented, triplex drugs might be able to cut off transcription in midstream. 

Studies of living cells add weight to the probability that triplex compounds can eventually be used against diseaserelated genes.
Hélène has established that oligonucleotides targeted to the control region of the gene coding for the interleukin-2 receptor can inhibit expression of that gene.
Postel and others in Hogans laboratory have likewise shown that an oligonucleotide targeted to the regulatory region of the human c-myc gene can inhibit the genes transcription in a human tumor-cell line.
Other laboratories have similarly demonstrated that oligonucleotides can reduce transcription of various cancer-related and viral genes in living cells.
So far no data from animal trials have been reported, and no human trials are under way. 
But that picture is likely to change in the next few years.

This is not to say the road ahead will always be smooth. 
Along with the difficulties faced by anyone interested in developing oligonucleotide-based drugs, triplex researchers are confronting special challenges of their own.
For instance, the oligonucleotides that manage to stall transcription in cells today do so only when relatively high concentrations are delivered. 
Designs that might lower the required doses are being pursued.

A more major limitation is the requirement that targets carry virtually all their purines on the same strand.
Few deviations from this ideal can be accommodated at present. 
Yet more than half of the potential targets on duplex DNA contain a mixture of purine and pyrimidines on each strand. 
As a first solution to this problem, Dervan and his colleagues have replaced the phosphate groups in oligomers with a chemical grouping that allows the oligonucleotides to «hop» from one strand to the other.
Even more sophisticated structural changes are being investigated.
Undoubtedly, some of them will extend the range of DNA targets available to triplex-forming oligonucleotides.

Antisense and triplex technologies may be far from perfect now.
But if the successes of the past few years are any guide, antisense and triplex agents will be improved rapidly. 
We expect that such drugs will one day be common as treatments for illnesses, such as many viral and genetic diseases, for which no effective therapies yet exist.

Figure 1

TWO INNOVATIVE STRATEGIES are being tested for inhibiting the production of disease-related proteins

For any protein to be synthesized (left), the gene that specifies its composition must be transcribed from DNA (a) into molecules of messenger RNA.
Then the RNA must be translated (b) into copies of the protein.
The triplex strategy (center) aims to stall production of an unwanted protein by selectively inhibiting transcription of its gene.

The antisense strategy (right) aims to selectively impede translation.

Figure 2

NUCLEOTIDES ARE BUILDING BLOCKS of the new genetic medicines, which typically consist of 15 to 20 units

The nucleotides in the drugs, like those in natural DNA, consist of a sugar (blue), a phosphate group (brown) and any of the four nitrogen-rich bases (red) listed at top right. 
In the antisense agents, one oxygen atom in each phosphate group is often replaced by a sulfur atom (S) or a methyl group (CH3) (box at bottom right).
Such changes help the drugs to resist breakdown by enzymes in cells.

Figure 3

BINDING OF OLIGONUCLEOTIDES (red) to nucleic acid targets (green) is represented by space-filling models (left)

One oligonucleotide, an antisense agent, twists around a messenger RNA strand (top), creating a double helix. 
The other oligonucleotide winds around the deep major groove of the DNA double helix, producing a triple helix (bottom). 
The nucleotides (identified by the first letter of their bases) in the binding agents and their targets are indicated next to the models.

Figure 4

GENE TRANSCRIPTION OCCURS (a) after proteins attach to the control region of a gene, forming a transcription complex

This complex directs the enzyme RNA polymerase (purple) to copy the instructions in the coding region into messenger RNA ( dark green).
Most triplex-forming agents (red) are targeted to the control region, to prevent RNA polymerase from attaching to a gene (b).
Drugs targeted to the coding region might also halt transcription midstream (c).

Figure 5

TRANSLATION IS ACCOMPLISHED (a) by structures called ribosomes, which travel along RNA transcripts, constructing proteins as they go

Binding of an antisense drug (orange) to messenger RNA can inhibit translation in at least two ways.
It can prevent the ribosomes from beginning or completing their journey (b).
It can also induce an enzyme, ribonuclease H, to cut the RNA at the site of drug binding (c).
Cleaved RNA cannot be translated and is rapidly degraded in cells.

Figure 6

CANCER CELLS (dark spots) have markedly infiltrated the cranial cavity (whitish area) of a leukemic mouse(left)

But the cells have not spread to that area in a leukemic mouse treated with an antisense oligonucleotide directed against c-myb (right)-a cancer-related gene. 
Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania are now conducting human trials of the same drug in patients who have leukemia.
