
Sharp disparities in the speed of global integration

The pace of global economic integration ---the widening and intensifying of international linkages in trade and finance--- has accelerated over the past decade.
During 1985 - 94 the ratio of world trade to GDP rose three times faster than in the preceding ten years and nearly twice as fast as in the 1960s.
Over the same period foreign direct investment doubled as a share of global GDP.

Developing countries too have been part of this trend of growing integration in aggregate.
Overall, their trade to GDP ratio rose as fast as that of industrial countries and their share of global foreign direct investment rose to two fifths.
But there are wide disparities in both rates of growth and integration across developing countries.
Some have even become less integrated with the global economy.

Integration matters because there is an association between growth performance and integration.
Fast growth tends to promote a more open economy, reflecting policies common to both, and hence lagging integration is a sign of underlying policy deficiencies.
Additionally, integration tends to promote higher growth, through the channels of better resource allocation, greater competition, transfer of technology, and access to foreign savings.
Many of the countries that are lagging in global integration are among the poorest.

Policies found to have a strong bearing on the pace of integration include macroeconomic policies, trade reform, and the provision of physical infrastructure.
Macroeconomic stability ---for instance, the size of fiscal deficits and the volatility of the real exchange rate--- shows a close empirical relationship positively with integration.
This suggests that the right macro- policies are not only good for growth and inflation, but also help to facilitate an outward orientation.

Many developing countries have lagged behind in opening to world trade ---and are deterred by perceptions of trade barriers.

But some of these fears are exaggerated.
For example, tariffs are much lower now than when the East Asian "newly industrialized" economies (NIEs) started their export drive in the 1960s.
Some of the real obstacles are external ---the spread of antidumping practices, agricultural protection, and the still-operative Multifiber Arrangement.
Continuing efforts on the part of the international community are needed to open markets in these areas.
And genuine adjustment costs do exist, which is why complementary reforms are important for managing those costs.

Many countries lagging in integration are dependent on exports of primary commodities.
But the success of other commodity exporters ---such as Chile, Malaysia, Morocco, and Turkey--- suggests that commodity production in itself does not condemn a country to low productivity and an inability to diversify.
The succesful exporters encouraged investment by strengthening the private sector, attracting foreign direct investment, and developing research and infrastructure.

Finally, fast integrators are characterized by high investment in infrastructure, for example electric power production, paved roads, and telephones.
The example of high transport costs for Sub-Saharan African exports shows how a lack of adequate infrastructure can be a serious impediment to advancing integration.

Fast integrators---and slow

Though developing countries in the aggregate kept pace with the world rate of trade integration, the ratio of trade to GDP actually fellin some 44 out of 93 developing countries observed over the last 10 years.
A further 17 countries experienced only moderate rises.
In fact, three-quarters of the remarkable increase over the past decade was accounted for by just ten countries.
Similarly, although the developing countries' share of FDI increased to 38 percent of the world's total, two-thirds of these flows went to just eight developing countries; half received little or none.
This trend is likely to continue unless policies are changed.
Trade and investment will accelerate in those countries that have opened up to the global economy.
The prognosis for those that fail to integrate is poor, and the divisions between the integrated and isolated countries will continue to widen.

The analysis here uses a speed of integration index derived from changes between the early 1980s and early 1990s in four indicators: the ratio of real trade to GDP, the ratio of foreign direct investment to GDP,Institutional Investorcredit ratings, and the share of manufactures in exports.
The speed of integration index is the simple average of changes in the four indicators over the period (each expressed as a standard deviation from its average).

On the basis of this index, developing countries are grouped in four categories ranging from "fast integrators" to "slow integrators".
This classification is not intended to derive a precise categorization of individual countries but rather to develop evidence about the factors that might account for large differences in the speed of integration among groups of countries, and the consequences of this for performance.

Most of the fast-growing East Asian exporters were among the fast integrators as a result of exceptionally large increases in trade, manufactures exports, and foreign direct investment ratios.
This group also contains reformers such as Argentina, Chile, and Mexico in Latin America; Morocco in the Middle East; Ghana and Mauritius in Sub-Saharan Africa; and the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Turkey in Europe.
The concentration of transition economies in this and the next category of moderate integrators results from the marked rise in these countries' trade shares, foreign direct investment inflows, and credit ratings after the fall of communism.

South Asian countries are concentrated in the fast or moderate integrator categories but retain considerable potential for furthering integration.
Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan had average tariffs in the early 1990s of 50 percent or more.
Among other Asian countries, China had average tariffs of around 40 percent.
Nontariff barriers in some of these countries were also high.

The weak and slow integrators include not only most of the low-income countries in Sub-Saharan Africa but also many middle-income countries in Latin America and the Middle East and North Africa.

Trade ratios advanced strongly in some regions in the past ten years, though they fell in Sub-Saharan Africa, were flat in the Middle East and North Africa, and barely edged forward in South Asia.
Overall, trade ratios fell in forty-four of ninety-three developing countries, representing more than one billion people, or 26 percent of the sample population.

Levels of and changes in tariffs also vary widely across developing regions.
Tariff levels matter because high levels of protection can seriously impair growth.
Tariffs in South Asia, averaging around 45 percent in the early 1990s, remain far higher than in other regions, despite substantial falls, while those in the Middle East and North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa, both in the 25 - 30 percent range, have shown little change since the second half of the 1980s.
However, several transition economies in Central and Eastern Europe have achieved average tariffs of about 10 percent, while rates in Latin America and East Asia (excluding China) are down to around 15 percent.

The distribution of foreign direct investment across developing countries is also highly skewed.
Eight countries that account for 30 percent of developing country GDP garnered two-thirds of overall FDI flows in 1990 - 93.
For half the ninety-three developing countries reviewed, foreign direct investment inflows were less than 0.25 percent of GDP in 1991 - 93.
Regions with particularly low ratios of foreign direct investment to GDP included South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Middle East and North Africa.

Country credit ratings generated by banks or rating agencies show wide disparities across developing countries, with many countries completely shut out of medium- and long-term private markets.Institutional Investor'srecent ratings for 126 countries are divided into four equal ranges labeled, from best to worst, A through D.
Such ratings are an important influence on the cost of funds in international markets.

More than 40 percent of the countries were in the lowest rating category.
These include half or more of the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America (chiefly in Central America and the Caribbean), and Europe and Central Asia (almost all states of the former Soviet Union).
They also include nearly half the countries in the Middle East and North Africa, as well as Bangladesh, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Myanmar, Nepal, and Vietnam in Asia.

The share of manufactures in exports may provide some information on countries' access to learning and technology transfer gains and ability to produce at world standards.
This ratio varies a great deal: two-thirds of the ninety-three developing countries reviewed had a share of manufactures in exports of a third or less in 1983 - 92, while half stood at less than 20 percent.
Sub-Saharan Africa's share of manufactures in exports was less than 10 percent, while the Middle East and North Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean had average shares of 20 - 25 percent.

Integration and growth go hand-in-hand

The high-income countries and fast integrators among the developing countries achieved median per capita GDP growth of about 2 percent a year over the past decade.
Moreover, the experience of the fast integrators was not merely a reflection of high-growth East Asian countries, although they are important.

Excluding East Asian countries, fast integrators still achieved median per capita growth of 1.5 percent a year, well above the other classes of integrators.
Median incomes fell among the other groups of integrators, with the largest declines occurring among the weak and slow groups.
There was also a strong association between growth in 1984 - 93 and the level of integration prevailing at the beginning of the period.

Countries with better integration performance enjoyed not only higher but also more stable growth: the median standard deviation of per capita GDP growth among fast integrators was a little over half as high as among the weak and slow integrators.

The positive effect of freer trade and foreign investment on growth is one factor explaining the relation between integration and growth.
Simply put, factors such as technology transfer and learning, improved resource allocation, greater competition, and access to foreign capital help countries grow.

But this is only one part of the interaction between integration and growth.
Growth itself tends to promote integration.
Imports rise faster than incomes as consumers satisfy their desire for diversity.
The rising returns to capital associated with faster growth raise developing country capital goods imports.

Fast-growing countries attract more FDI and obtain better credit terms.
East Asia most clearly illustrates how rapid growth tends to project countries onto regional and world markets while lack of growth, as in Sub-Saharan Africa, leads to marginalization in world goods and capital markets.

The close association between growth and the speed of integration also suggests that both are likely to be affected by a number of common factors, including changes in the external environment, the evolution of the institutional setting, and the policies pursued by governments.

Policy reforms make the difference

The centrality of policy reform is illustrated by marked disparities evident not just between regions, but within them.

Indeed, each region has both fast and slow-integrating countries, and while this does not mean that all regions face similar challenges to openness, it does highlight the powerful effects of sound national policy.

Policy reforms designed to increase growth and stability are likely to influence a country's speed of integration both directly and through their effect on growth, which, as noted above, also helps promote integration.
Three types of policies affect the speed of integration relatively quickly: those relating to macroeconomic policy, telecommunications and transport infrastructure, and trade regimes.

Macroeconomic policy affects integration through the impact of macroeconomic instability on FDI, other foreign capital inflows, and investment in the export sector of the economy.

Macroeconomic volatility is estimated to have reduced developing country growth in 1960 - 90 by as much as 0.9 percentage point a year.
Volatility is especially likely to discourage foreign investors, who know less about the country than domestic investors, have greater choice in pursuing alternate opportunities outside the country, and are likely to attach a higher risk premium to a more unstable economy.

Countries that suffer from higher macroeconomic instability tend to be slower integrators.
In 1984 - 93, median inflation rates were 7 - 11 percentage points lower in fast than in weak and slow integrators.
Inflation volatility was also much lower among fast integrators.
Slower integrators tend to have higher and more volatile fiscal deficits and to shrink their deficits at a slower rate.
And countries undertaking stabilization after severe macroeconomic crises often use the opportunity to open their economies---because it is easier to gain political support to do so.

The second policy area affecting the pace of integration is the availability and proper maintenance of adequate economic infrastructure, in particular telecommunications and transport facilities.
High-quality communications are essential for countries that aim to participate in the globalized production structures established by multinational corporations, to respond promptly to rapidly changing market conditions in industrial countries, or to participate in new export markets for long-distance services such as data processing, software programming, back-office services, and customer support.

High transport costs deriving in part from domestic policies are a serious impediment to African exports.
Summary statistics on 1993 transport costs show that Africa is at an important cost disadvantage relative to its competitors.
The figure shows median costs, represented by a horizontal bar, and the range of costs around the median, represented by a vertical bar whose endpoints mark the first and third quartiles of export volume.
The shaded bars show the margin of African costs over those of other countries.
For example, the median vessel nominal freight rate for middle-income West Africa---10 percent---is about 2 percentage points higher than that paid by other developing countries.
This compares with the average 2.4 percentage point reduction in industrial country tariffs (to 3.9 percent) achieved in the Uruguay Round.
Some African exports encounter even higher transport costs.
For example, 25 percent (the third quartile) of Sub-Saharan Africa's air exports encounter freight rates exceeding 26 percent, and about a quarter of low-income West Africa's vessel shipments have nominal freight rates of more than 19 percent.

What type of corrective policy measures could be used to address these distortions? The options include such measures as cargo bulking to achieve economies of scale in transport, rationalization of shipping services and improved scheduling for liners.
Deregulation of anticompetitive cargo reservation schemes can significantly lower freight costs for developing countries.

Managing the costs of trade integration

For many developing countries, successful integration will depend on trade liberalization, requiring difficult policy decisions that often lead to real and painful costs.
These costs must be acknowledged from the outset, and the effects carefully taken into account in the design of programs.
But the costs are manageable.
In fact, openness to external trade and investment is often the necessary step to solid, sustainable, economic development.
Reform programs targeted at economic opening work best when they plan for dislocation and acknowledge various cultural, social, and historical dynamics that will help determine their success.

Regionalism is a sufficiently diverse and new phenomenon as to defy simple conclusions.
But recent experience---notably, the growth of East Asian trade---suggests that it is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for successful integration with the world economy.
Nevertheless, preferential trading arrangements between developing and industrial countries can carry important benefits for developing countries by securing markets, encouraging investment, and enhancing the discipline and credibility of reform.
The benefits of trade arrangements between developing countries tend to be much smaller.

Another important concern of policymakers is that world markets in trade do not offer a level playing field, making for a low probability of success in opening to trade.
Developing countries' fear that global markets for goods and services are stacked against them helps explain why some (particularly in the Middle East, Africa, and Central America) have adopted a gradualist and overly cautious approach to trade reform.
But some of these fears are exaggerated.
For example, tariff barriers are much lower now than when the newly industrialized countries of East Asia started their industrialization drive in the 1960s.

External obstacles: antidumping and the Multifiber Arrangement 

Still, there are some serious external obstacles, including antidumping and the Multifiber Arrangement.
Because they are rarely motivated by sensible economic criteria, antidumping actions remain a menace to free trade and can have serious repercussions.
Disturbingly, developing countries are increasingly turning to antidumping actions.

The number of antidumping actions reported to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Secretariat has fluctuated widely over the past decade, but since 1990 there has been a steady rise in activity among antidumpers.
The number of antidumping initiations reported in the year preceding June 1994 was 2.5 times greater than the number reported just five years earlier.
Often the threat of a formal antidumping duty or the loss of customers resulting from the uncertainty created by the Secretariat's investigation has induced exporters to agree to a voluntary export restraint.

The other serious external obstacle, the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) quotas, constitutes a huge compulsory export tax on developing country exports of textiles and clothing.
Their eventual removal will have highly beneficial welfare effects in industrial countries, with varying effects in developing countries.
But because the phasing out will likely be delayed until the last moment ---in 2005--- the MFA, which covers virtually all fabrics and all significant developing country exporters, continues to represent a major distortion to world trade.

Broad estimates suggest that the export tax equivalents are enormous, ranging from 16 - 48 percent and affecting exporting countries differently.
The protection provided by the MFA quotas is all the more remarkable given that they are imposed on top of some of the highest tariffs on manufactured goods---about 13 percent on textiles and clothing imports from developing countries.

Among exporters, the greatest gains from the MFA phaseout will likely go to highly efficient producers whose current exports to industrial country markets are tightly constrained by quotas.
Thus China, Indonesia, Thailand, and South Asia should gain from the abolition of the MFA.
Also gaining will be countries such as Kenya that have demonstrated the capacity to develop clothing exports, only to be faced with a newly imposed quota.

Integration and successful commodity producers

Most of the countries that have been the slowest to integrate with the global economy are primary commodity - dependent countries---primary commodities account for more than half of their exports.
Although many commodity exporters ---notably in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and North Africa, and Central America--- suffer from low productivity in the primary sector and an inability to diversify their production and export structures, others are among the fast growing.
Indeed, the commodity-dependent fast-growing countries, which included Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, the Philippines, Thailand, and Turkey, have actually grown faster in per capita terms than the fifteen developing countries that are primarily manufactures exporters.

Successful commodity producers shared the following characteristics.

High productivity in existing commodities.
Successful and unsuccessful commodity-dependent exporters exhibited a pronounced difference in per capita growth in capital stock and income during 1980 - 90.
Countries that invested more tended to grow much faster ---nearly 3 percentage points a year--- and have been fast integrators.

Diversification into nontraditional commodities.
Commodity-dependent countries have varied widely in their capacity to increase diversification and productivity, as evidenced by the composition of their export growth in real terms over 1972 - 92.
The four successful producers chosen---Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand---experienced spectacular growth in nontraditional exports such as fruits and vegetables and shrimp, and steady growth in other agricultural categories.

Fostering productivity.
Successful commodity producers have established climates that are conducive to foreign and domestic investment.
- Strengthening the private sector and achieving large gains in efficiency by abolishing public sector monopolies in production and marketing.
- Attracting foreign capital and technology by fostering market incentives in the private sector and by removing regulatory barriers, especially to foreign firms.
- Enhancing research and development and infrastructure capacities to maintain competitiveness.
- Promoting financial flexibility to strengthen export and inventory financing of commodities.


Consider these examples:

Ghana's gold production soared once mines were privatized.

Production had dropped to 8.6 tons by 1983 because of inadequate investment in exploration and extraction technologies.
Once the state-owned mines were sold and a public offering was held for the largest producer, Ashanti, production soared to nearly 45 tons in 1994.

Yields and profits have been much higher on Sri Lanka's private tea estates than on the state-owned estates (which were recently partially privatized).
In 1991 yields were 2,442 kilograms per hectare for the private estates and 1,268 for the state-owned.
The difference in gross profits was even more telling: $1,196 per hectare for the private estates and $203 for the state-owned.

When Turkey liberalized the seed trade in the mid-1980s, private companies rushed to introduce hybrid varieties of maize.

Within four years private hybrids had spread to roughly a third of maize-planted areas, and national average maize yields had doubled.

From 1961 - 63 to 1992 - 93 Malaysia's share of the world palm oil industry rose from 7 percent to 51 percent, thanks to rapid and sustained gains in yields (even after allowance for some unsustainable elements in production growth).
Research efforts ---public and private--- resulted in the development of superior planting materials and techniques.
Research leading to the release of pollination weevils in 1982, for example, resulted in a rise by one-third in oil extraction rates from the palm oil kernel.

Favorable long-run prospects for the growth and integration of developing countries

Developments in the world economy since the start of 1995 have been largely benign, with somewhat lower than expected G-7 growth accompanied by reduced pressure on already low inflation rates, unusually fast growth of world trade, and low nominal and real interest rates.
Reflecting these developments and such policy factors as improved prospects for fiscal consolidation in industrial countries, our projections envisage a favorable international economic environment for developing countries in aggregate, although some will benefit much more than others.

Compared with the preceding decade, factors favoring higher growth (besides the recovery of the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union) include the continued liberalization and fast growth of world trade and the lower level of real interest rates compared with those prevailing during much of the 1980s.
There are, however, downside risks of slow OECD growth, to which the poorest countries are especially vulnerable.

- The increased probability of a more stretched-out industrial country recovery, with growth continuing at modest but more steady rates and contributing to a more stable external environment for developing countries.
- Inflation and world real interest rates over the next decade that are likely to be lower than previously expected as a result of firm monetary policies, declining inflationary expectations, and continued fiscal consolidation in industrial countries.
- Private capital flows to developing countries that were unexpectedly resilient in the aftermath of the Mexico crisis.
Factors such as moderate real international interest rates, continued liberalization in developing countries, and portfolio diversification in industrial countries are likely to support continued significant growth in private flows over the coming decade.
But fiscal constraints and other pressures are unlikely to allow much room for growth in official aid flows.

- The current boom in world trade, which is expected to be followed by a decade of strong growth in trade volumes ---averaging a little over 6 percent a year--- including significant growth in trade between developing countries.
These developments will be supported by implementation of the Uruguay Round and other trade liberalization initiatives, continued declines in transport and communications costs, and growth in foreign direct investment.

- The fading of the cyclical boom in non-oil commodity prices during 1995.
Over the long term, commodity prices are expected to continue to decline in real terms, though a more gradual pace of decline than in the past decade is expected to contribute to a more stable environment for commodity-reliant developing countries.
Real oil prices are projected to decline by more than 1 percent a year on average over the next decade---rather than rising by the same amount, as anticipated in last year's report---implying heightened pressure for adjustment and reforms in major oil exporters.



This broadly favorable external environment and the expectation of sustained reform underpin the projected acceleration of growth in developing countries (excluding the transition economies) from 3.4 percent in 1981 - 90 and 5.0 percent in 1991 - 94 to 5.4 percent over the next ten years.
The transition economies ---the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union--- are expected to consolidate their recovery and, indeed, to achieve higher growth than all other developing regions except East and South Asia.
Though all developing regions are projected to match or exceed their growth performance of the past decade, the disparities among them will remain large, with Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East and North Africa registering only modest increases in per capita incomes.

These are trend projections, and cyclical fluctuations are bound to occur, though the likelihood of pronounced boom-bust cycles is low in the foreseeable future.
However, there are industrial country sources of longer-term risk, including problems induced by aging populations, financial sector weaknesses in Japan, and the persistence of high unemployment in Europe.

These projections paint an aggregate picture of rapid growth and further advances in the integration of developing countries with the world economy over the next ten years.
Some countries will prosper; others, including some of the poorest, are likely to experience only moderate rates of growth.

Industrial country growth will be modest, but inflation and interest rates will remain moderate and world trade will grow rapidly.
Wide disparities will persist in growth rates across developing countries, and these disparities will be reflected in (and, to some extent, be a reflection of) the pace at which countries are becoming integrated with the global economy.

Regional summaries

East Asia

Remarkable export performance and strong investment continued to underpin East Asia's rapid output growth in 1995.

For the second year in a row the region's GDP growth exceeded 9 percent, and almost all countries continued to outstrip their ten-year trend growth rates.
Current estimates suggest that the region's export volumes surged 21 percent over 1994 while imports rose 18 percent.
This growth exerted a significant pull on the economies of trading partners both within and outside the region.

Rapid growth of world import demand and the competitive boost provided by the yen's appreciation in the first part of 1995 contributed to the region's export success and helped indirectly stimulate investment in export and domestic sectors.

The region's countries continued to outpace the world in their speed of integration over the past ten years:

Trade/GDP ratios continued to grow.

Tariffs dropped below 20 percent for the first time (except in China).

Foreign direct investment rates are second only to those in high-income countries.

Five of 10 countries earned investment grade credit ratings, with Korea and Malaysia at the top of developing countries.

The share of manufacturing in exports rose by 15 percentage points, from 35 percent to 50 percent.

Growth is forecast to slow slightly over the next ten years, though only in line with slowing population growth.
Per capita incomes are expected to increase by an annual average of 6.9 percent, the same as in 1986 - 95.
The income advance will be accompanied by further strong progress in countries' integration with global and regional economies.
Various regional and unilateral trade liberalization measures (such as China's recent announcement of planned tariff reductions) and growing investment links within the region are expected to continue to fuel intraregional trade, which has advanced at rates faster than 20 percent a year in current U.S. dollar terms in the 1990s.

South Asia

With continuing reforms, countries in South Asia posted respectable growth in 1995.
India, which accounts for 80 percent of the region's GDP, continued to draw substantial benefits from the trade and investment liberalization undertaken after 1991.

Exports in dollar terms grew around 20 percent, while manufacturing output growth averaged more than 10 percent in the past two years.
Inflation edged higher throughout the region except in India, largely a reflection of missed fiscal targets and still-high structural deficits.

Trade growth matches the recent improved output performance:

Tariffs remain highest at 45 percent, even after falling 15 points.

Low rates of foreign direct investment were boosted by Indian reforms.

Only India enjoys an investment grade rating.

Manufactures as share of exports rose 20 percentage points, from about 45 percent to 65 percent.

Growth should average 5.4 percent a year in the next decade, reaching close to 6 percent in the later years.
The implied per capita GDP growth of 3.7 percent would represent a substantial improvement ---over the past ten years and for poverty reduction.
This outlook assumes that recent slippages in meeting fiscal deficit targets will be corrected, something that would raise overall savings and investment rates by 4 - 5 percentage points for the region as a whole.

Latin America and the Caribbean

Mexico's balance of payments crisis in December 1994 produced repercussions throughout the region in 1995.
Argentina was immediately affected by dwindling private capital inflows in the first half of 1995, as were most countries in the region except Chile and Colombia.
In the second half of the year most countries were able to regain access to private capital markets through the issuance of bonds but at much higher spreads.
Output is estimated to have fallen by more than 3 percent in Argentina (where unemployment reached almost 20 percent) and by nearly 7 percent in Mexico.
Growth slowed in some other countries as well, indicated by the decline in median growth from 4.1 percent in 1994 to 3.4 percent in 1995.

The past decade's explosive growth in trade ratios slowed with the peso crisis:

Tariff levels were down to 15 percent from 30 percent in the late 1980s.

Foreign direct investment growth was negligible---still middle of the pack.

Chile and Colombia are investment grade, but some credit ratings have slipped.

Growth in 1996 - 97 is expected to average 2.6 percent a year, compared with 3 percent a year in 1991 - 95.
Recovery from the recession in Mexico is expected to be sluggish in 1996 as domestic interest rates remain high to help stabilize the peso and restrain inflation, as well as to reflect the credit constraints caused by the banking problem.
In the longer term (2001 - 05) annual growth is expected to pick up to 4 percent---a marked improvement over the region's performance of the past fifteen years, especially in per capita terms.

Europe and Central Asia

The fall in aggregate output slowed to less than 1 percent in 1995 from 8.5 percent in 1994.
Among transition economies, growth in Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltic states accelerated by 1.5 points to 5 percent.
Expansion in this group, ranging from some 7 percent in Poland to sluggish gains in Bulgaria and Latvia, continued to be led by the strong performance of exports (which rose some 30 percent in dollar terms), a 20 percent increase in real private investment, and further growth in emerging services sectors.

The region is close to the world average for its speed of integration and is accelerating:

Trade/GDP ratios slightly out-paced high-income countries in 1985 - 94.

Central Europe's four states reduced tariffs to 10 percent, the lowest in the Bank's groupings.

Foreign investment ratios approached those of East Asia.

The Czech Republic, Poland, and Slovakia enjoy investment grade ratings, but many others are much lower.

Strong exports and private investment are likely to support 4 - 5 percent growth for the Central and Eastern European countries during 1996 ---a milestone for Poland, since it means that real incomes will return to pretransition levels.
As the benefits of stabilization in Bulgaria and the Baltics materialize more fully, as Hungary emerges from near-term adjustment, and as the war-torn republics of the former Yugoslavia are given respite, regional growth is likely to be maintained near 4 percent in the medium term.

Middle East and North Africa

A limited upturn to 2.5 percent growth in 1995 can be attributed to somewhat higher growth in the major oil exporters---Algeria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia---tied to a transient increase in oil prices, which averaged 3.5 percent above 1994 levels.
But prices weakened significantly in the later part of 1995, and current projections suggest that oil exporters are likely to face a longer-term trend of gradual erosion in real prices, which fell by nearly 8 percent a year in 1981 - 95.

The region's countries must look to more open trade and peace in the Middle East to break out of the decade-long stagnation in their speed of integration:

Trade ratios have remained flat.

Tariffs have dropped only slightly since 1989, remaining at 25+ percent.

Foreign direct investment dropped from 1.0 percent of GDP to 0.3 percent.

Tunisia is rated investment grade; most other countries are much lower and unrated.

Regional GDP should register annual growth of 2.9 percent during the next decade, compared with 2 percent during the past ten years.
As oil export volumes rise by 2.5 - 3.5 percent over the period, modest regional spillover effects from worker remittances and other income flows should follow.
Although it will take time for the direct effects of the EU's Mediterranean Initiative to become evident, participants' commitments to reform should set the stage for improved competitiveness and higher FDI inflows in the medium term.
