
Alternative Fuels for Automobiles: 

Hydrogen potential and its implications 

Issue: 

The main concerns over automobile fuels include emission effects on health and environment, and, for the longer term, energy security.

Hydrogen, as an alternative vehicle fuel, presents particular characteristics that have to be carefully examined in order to evaluate its potential and implications.
Recent advances within transport technology demonstration programmes have prompted renewed interest in hydrogen which, in Japan and the US, is being followed by significant policy steps.

Relevance: 

The market for alternative automobile fuels is expected to grow rapidly as they pass successfully through research, test and demonstration stages.
This has serious repercussions for the automotive and related industries, assuming that the main barriers are overcome, i.e. price, refuelling infrastructure, safety and on- board-storage concerns and public acceptance.
Given the renewed interest and promising technical developments, the harmonisation of European policies and regulations appears evermore important.

Introduction 

Hydrogen is claimed to be one of the cleanest transport fuels.

At present, there is no alternative fuel in the mass market that minimises the negative effects of, and competes with, conventional fossil fuels, i.e. gasoline and diesel.
No fuel meets all the requirements of energy content, local/global emissions, cost, public acceptance, safety, sustainable supply, and maturity of technologies and infrastructure for fuel production, transportation and distribution.

It is claimed that hydrogen (H2) is a suitable fuel for transport applications, and one of the cleanest.
Hydrogen presents advantages from both environment and energy security viewpoints, yet it also has serious drawbacks, especially for automobile applications where tighter safety and on-board storage requirements have to be met.

Hydrogen issues specific to automobiles 

Hydrogen can be used to fuel slightly modified internal combustion engines (ICEs) or to feed fuel cells that generate electricity for electric vehicles (EVs).
It can also be blended with natural gas (15-30% H2) to power ICEs (Pohl, 1995).
The main issues, specific to automobiles, concern on-board storage and, perhaps most sensitively, safety.

Hydrogen has been used for a long time, as a feedstock for many industrial applications and in space-programmes to fuel rockets, with a relatively good safety record.
Its use as an automotive fuel has also been tried during the past two decades without major safety problems, but on a very small scale and therefore, the overall safety of hydrogen in powering vehicles on a broad scale remains to be demonstrated.

Safety is a major concern.

In fact, hydrogen has particular characteristics that require careful examination.
Some of its physical properties make it more hazardous than other fuels when it is released into confined or poorly vented areas.
On the other hand, hydrogen is non-toxic and can be less dangerous than other fuels when adequate venting is in place (see Box 1).
Therefore the design of hydrogen systems for automobiles should emphasise the prevention, detection and mitigation of leaks and the avoidance of confined spaces.

Box 1.Safety-related aspects of hydrogen as a vehicle fuel 

Embrittlement. 

Can provoke metal embrittlement and induce reduction of fracture toughness even when stored at low pressures.
The choice of materials for storage and transportation is therefore very important.

Venting. 

A critical aspect of storage and manipulation of hydrogen.
Safety measures should assure clean supply lines, avoidance of close ignition sources, elimination of possible confinement and all materials employed should be compatible with hydrogen.

Refuelling. 

Safe systems should also prevent air from entering the filling lines and vessels, and avoid major fuel leakage.

Thorough measures for intrinsic safety and interlocked functions should be implemented.

Crashworthiness. 

The storage vessel and fuel lines should be carefully placed and protected against crashes.
In addition, in case of leakage, hydrogen confinement should be avoided.

Hydrogen could offer zero pollution emissions.

By far the main advantage of hydrogen is its low or zero emission of pollutants.
In fact, hydrogen-powered ICEs produce only water and some nitrogen oxides that can be avoided by upgraded combustion (and some unburned hydrocarbons from lubricating oil).
More significantly, its use in fuel cells involves no harmful emissions.
However, in terms of the global emission problem related to greenhouse gases (mainly CO2), hydrogen s impact depends largely on the way it is produced, and more generally on the full energy cycle.

The challenge of on-board storage is being addressed through materials research.

Regarding its energy characteristics, hydrogen s energy content per kilogramme is about three times higher than for gasoline, but its energy content per litre is only a quarter (though somewhat different when including vessel characteristics, see Table 1).
In theory, the performance of liquid hydrogen is comparable to gasoline, when considering vehicle range, but the energy density of the compressed fuel is significantly lower.

Thus, the characteristics of the on-board energy storage system required presents a major problem.
Many options for such systems are under study, but this remains a major technical challenge for automobile applications (see Box 2).
Hence, the importance of research in this area (e.g. on advanced materials, nanomaterials, etc.).

Box 2. Hydrogen on-board storage technologies 

Conventional systems include compressed storage, liquid storage and metal hydrides, all of which are, to some extent, limited by either excess weight, volume, refuelling time, cost or safety.

These problems are being addressed through RD e.g. use of new light-weight materials.
Promising systems, still at research level, comprise:

Carbon adsorption: 

Hydrogen can be adsorbed on to activated carbon at cryogenic temperatures (about -115 °C) and also within the porous carbon structure under pressure, thus achieving concentrations similar to that of liquid hydrogen.
This system could combine the advantages of compressed and liquid hydrogen storage.

Other hydrogen storage systems: 

On-going research on bonded-hydrogen storage systems includes liquid hydrides and an iron/water system.
In these, hydrogen is chemically bound to other compounds and released through a reversible reaction.
Although, these systems could present some advantages, they involve complex chemical processes, still not well understood.

Hydrogen has advantages over many conventional technologies in terms of overall efficiency.

The comparison of hydrogen with other fuels should also include the efficiency of energy conversion throughout the overall cycle.
Regarding its use in conventional spark-ignition engines, reported results indicate that hydrogen engines could be 15-25% more efficient than gasoline ones.
In addition, fuel cells, that offer a much higher efficiency than conventional engines, could further improve hydrogen conversion to 20-30% (SAE, 1994).

Another interesting comparison is with natural gas (NG), a competitor to hydrogen and, at present, its main feedstock.
In fuel cells use of liquid hydrogen produced via the NG route is reported to have a small efficiency advantage over the direct use of NG.
By contrast, in ICEs use of liquid hydrogen is less efficient than direct use of NG.

Compared with electrical energy storage systems, hydrogen presents considerable advantages over electrochemical batteries, which, presently and for the foreseeable future, strongly limit the range of pure electric vehicles.

Table 1

Comparative characteristics of hydrogen and other fuels (IEA 1, 1993) 

Hydrogen in a broader context 

Barriers to the take-up of hydrogen technologies include high production costs.....

Hydrogen can be produced from virtually any energy source.
Many new methods are currently being explored, with special emphasis on those based on renewable energies (Table 2).
The main issue is high production costs, particularly for renewable energies which are, for the foreseeble future, also limited by supply capacity.
Today, the cheapest and most efficient method of producing hydrogen is through reformation of natural gas.

However, NG is a cheaper vehicle fuel than hydrogen.

...and distribution and refuelling infrastructure.

Regarding distribution, the present, low levels of demand for hydrogen are only covered by expensive truck or rail transportation.
To meet larger scale demand, pipeline distribution will be required.
In principle this does not present major technical obstacles because similar technology already exists, e.g. for natural gas transportation.
Yet here, too, safety has still to be demonstrated.
The cost of the required infrastructure, both for transportation and distribution is also a main limiting factor to hydrogen s market introduction.
In this respect, the success of on-going demonstration projects on H2-powered ships, trucks and buses could ease the way for automobile applications.

Finally, public acceptance of hydrogen is an important issue.

Certainly, long and extensive demonstration programmes would be required to achieve substantial market penetration.

Outlook of national hydrogen programmes 

There is considerable interest in hydrogen research at national level....

Hydrogen is considered a promising long-term solution for transport applications.
This is witnessed by the significance of national research programmes in the major industrialised countries (Table 2).
The overall investment includes funding from industry and other local or regional bodies (not shown in Table 2), which in many countries is substantial.

Over recent years, a shift in policy has been observed, the new priorities being more practical and near term applications (IEA 2, 1994).
This can be explained by certain shortcomings of renewable energies, a substantial contribution from which seems, at least, to be postponed.
Nevertheless, future support for hydrogen technologies is expected to be maintained worldwide, and even enhanced in countries such as Japan and the US, where large programmes are under discussion.

....but little European-level activity.

In Europe, even if the overall data show substantial activity, hydrogen programmes are concentrated in a few countries and clearly lack co-ordination and co-operation.
In particular, hydrogen is not addressed through any specific action under the EC s RTD programmes, and the funding of the the Euro-Quebec project, the largest on-going hydrogen project, has been interrupted.
Moreover, the lack of harmonised regulations and integrated infrastructure is hindering activities in this field, so delaying the clarification of the H2-option for Europe.

Table 2

National hydrogen programmes of some IEA countries 

Conclusion 

Recognition of hydrogen as a strategic issue in energy policy calls for greater co-ordination and co-operation across Europe.

The implications of hydrogen as an automotive fuel are manifold.

Hydrogen presents potentially large environmental benefits, and will certainly play a vital role if significant production is achieved from nuclear or renewable resources.
Yet, at present and for the medium term, its significant production is still likely to be from fossil fuels, in which case there is little or no benefit in terms of global emissions and energy security issues.
Some benefits could arise from the technical similarities between hydrogen and natural gas, which could be an incentive for the development of dual technologies.
Moreover, the success of on-going demonstration projects on other means of transportation could yield spin-offs for automobile applications.
In this respect, along with the improvement of utilisation technologies, the overall issues of hydrogen production, transportation and distribution have to be addressed.
And, in order to achieve public acceptance, key safety and cost issues will need to be overcome.

On the other hand, as far as local emissions are concerned, hydrogen could play an important role, but major technical challenges regarding safety and on-board storage remain.
In this context, important technical developments, that could substantially change the outlook for hydrogen, are taking place.

Moreover, it could be a major competitor to batteries for powering zero (or near zero) emission vehicles.

In any case, hydrogen is likely to remain a strategic issue of energy policy, as demonstrated by research programmes throughout the world.
In Europe, where hydrogen technology is at the forefront, there seems to be a need to reinforce co-ordination and co-operation, especially in terms of EU policies, and harmonising regulations and standards.

Keywords 

Alternative fuels, vehicle emissions, hydrogen technology, energy security, internal combustion engine, fuel cell, hydrogen safety, hydrogen production cost.
