
INTRODUCTION

This is a special time in medical genetics, when it has achieved a recognized role as a core discipline that deals with human variability and human heredity and at the same time has developed approaches that allow new insight into many diseases and promise to provide far more in the near future.
To give patients and their families the full benefit of expanding genetic knowledge, physicians and their colleagues in the health professions need to understand the underlying concepts of human gene tics and the role of genes and environment in normal and abnormal development and in disease.

ROLE OF GENETICS IN MEDICINE

The place of genetics in medicine was not always as obvious as it is today.
Although its significance both for the conceptual basis of medicine and for clinical practice is now fully recognized, not many years ago the subject was thought to be concerned only with the inheritance of trivial, superficial, and rare characteristics; the fundamental role of the gene in basic life processes was not understood.

The discovery of the principles of heredity by the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel in 1865 received virtually no recognition from biologists and none at all from other scientists.
Instead, his reports lay unnoticed in the scientific literature for 35 years.

Charles Darwin, whose great book The Origin of Species (published in 1859) emphasized the hereditary nature of variability among members of a species as an important factor in evolution, had no idea how inheritance operated.
At that time heredity was thought to involve blending of the traits of the two parents, and Jean Baptiste Lamarck's idea of the inheritance of acquired characteristics was still accepted. 
Mendelts work could have clarified Darwin's concept of the mechanism of inheritance of variability, but although Mendel was aware of Darwin's work, Darwin seems never to have known of the significance of Mendel's work or even of its existence. 
Darwin's cousin Francis Galton, one of the titans of early medical genetics, also remained ignorant of Mendel's work despite its relevance to his own studies of "nature and nurture." Mendel himself, perhaps discouraged by the results of later, less favorably designed experiments, eventually abandoned experimental research, although his interest in biological science remained strong throughout his life.

Mendel's laws, which form the cornerstone of the science of genetics, were derived from his experiments with garden peas, in which he crossed pure lines differing in one or more clear-cut characteristics and followed the progeny of the crosses for at least two generations.
The laws he derived from the results of his experiments may be stated as follows:

Unit inheritance.
Mendel clearly stated that blending of the characteristics of the parents did not occur but that, although they might not be expressed in the first-generation offspring, the parental traits could reappear unchanged in a later generation.
Modern teaching in genetics places little stress on this law, but in Mendel's time it was an entirely new concept.
The word gene to denote the unit of inheritance was not used until 1909, when it was introduced by Wilhelm Johannsen. 

Segregation.
The two members of a single gene pair, known today as alleles , are never found in the same gamete but always segregate and pass to different gametes.
In exceptional circumstances, when this rule is broken and the members of a chromosome pair fail to segregate normally, the typical consequence is severe abnormality in the offspring.

Independent assortment.
Members of different gene pairs assort to the gametes independently of one another.
In other words, there is random recombination of paternal and maternal chromosomes in the gametes.
As described later, there is an important exception to this role, not recognized by Mendel: genes closely linked on the same chromosome do not assort independently, but tend to remain together from generation to generation.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the rest of the biological community was ready to catch up with Mendel.
By a curious coincidence, three workers (Hugo De Vries in Holland, Carl Correns in Germany, and Erich von Tschermak in Austria) independently and simultaneously rediscovered Mendel's laws. 
The development of genetics as a science dates not from Mendel's own paper but from the papers that reported the rediscovery. 

The universal nature of Mendel's laws was soon recognized. 
As early as 1902 Archibald Garrod, who ranks with Francis Galton as a founder of medical genetics, could report the disorder alkaptonuria as the first human example of what is now known as Mendelian inheritance.
In his paper, Garrod generously admitted his debt to the biologist William Bateson, who had seen the genetic significance of consanguineous marriage in the parents of some patients with what Garrod called "inborn errors of metabolism" and of the fact that if more than one family member was affected, the other affected members were virtually always sibs of the index patient, not parents, offspring, or other relatives.
Bateson recognized this pattem as just what one would expect if alkaptonuria were inherited as a recessive trait in accordance with Mendel's laws.
This is the first clear evidence of interaction in research between medical and nonmedical geneticists, which has continued to the present day and has contributed greatly to the rapid expansion of the field.
It predated the introduction of the term genetics for the new science, which was also a contribution of Bateson, in 1906.

A growing understanding of the universal nature of the biological structure and function of living organisms led inevitably to recognition of the crucial role of genes in life processes. 
The concept, which was foreshadowed in Garrod's work, was formulated clearly by Beadle and Tatum in 1941 as the "one gene-one enzyme" hypothesis, now more generally phrased as "one gene-one protein." Today, human biochemical genetics is one of the dominant themes in medical genetics.

During the early 1940s, the molecular analysis of the genetic material made rapid progress, beginning with the discovery that genes are composed of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick described the molecular structure of DNA for which they were awarded the Nobel prize in 1962.
Other outstanding discoveries in the early days of molecular genetics included the recognition that the DNA of the genes is transcribed into ribonucleic acid (RNA), which is in turn translated into protein, and the elucidation of the genetic code, by which the amino acid sequence of proteins is recorded in DNA.

By the late 1950s, techniques for the scientific study of human chromosomes had been developed, and researchers began to explore the role of chromosomes in sexual development and of chromosome abnormalities as causes of abnormal physical and mental development and reproductive problems.
Even though human cytogenetics, the study of human chromosomes, has been a field of intensive research for many years, it still holds many challenging problems.
Significant new findings about normal and abnormal chromosome structure and function continue to be reported, especially now that chromosome analysis goes hand in hand with molecular analysis in the study of the human genome.

Since the mid-1970s, with the aid of powerful new technologies for the manipulation and analysis of DNA, the field of medical genetics has been transformed.
Scientists are now able to locate and identify genes responsible for essential human proteins, characterize their mutations, and learn the nature of their protein products, thus gaining a deeper understanding of many poorly understood or previously unknown causes of disease. 
Because the molecular approach was so different from earlier ones, and its potential so great, it was called "the new genetics." More recently, the terms reverse genetics and positional cloning have been used to denote the cloning of genes of unknown function by gene mapping techniques.
Some of the many examples of the molecular genetic approach to human diseases are described in later chapters. 

For many years, although there was great interest in the mapping of human genes to their chromosomal locations, progress was relatively slow.
A major reason for the difficulty was the unsuitability of human beings for gene mapping because of small family size, long generation time, and the impossibility of making the planned matings that can be used with experimental organisms.
By means of cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis together with family studies, however, human gene mapping has become a leading field of human genetic research.
The Human Genome Project, an international project to map the entire human genome by the year 2005, seems sure to be one of the major research programs in genetics and is expected to have important medical benefits (Watson, 1990).

The expansion and application of genetic knowledge has already had fruitful consequences for clinical medicine.
Today at least one third of the children in pediatric hospitals are there because of genetic disorders.
This is a great change from the early years of the century and even from before the antibiotic era.
Before the days of immunization, improved nutrition, and antibiotics, most hospitalized children had infectious diseases or nutritional disorders such as rickets.
Today some of those with infections have genetic defects that impair their resistance, and, at least in developed countries, most cases of rickets are due not to faulty nutrition but to deleterious genes.
Life-sav-ing advances in clinical and surgical medicine increase the probability of survival and thus tend to raise the prevalence of genetic defects.

Disciplines Within Human and Medical Genetics

Genetics is a diverse subject, concerned with variation and heredity in all living organisms.
Within this broad field, human genetics is the science of variation and heredity in human beings, and medical genetics deals with human genetic variation of medical significance.
The two areas have extensive overlap, and in fact to many geneticists they are one and the same.

Within human and medical genetics, there are many fields of interest, as indicated by the various directions in which genetics has developed, as outlined earlier.
Major recognized areas of specialization are the study of chromosomes (cytogenetics), the study of the structure and function of individual genes (molecular and biochemical genetics), and the application to diagnosis and patient care (clinical genetics).
The literal meaning of clinical is bedside ( klinikos , Greek for bedside), and a clinical geneticist is an appropriately qualified physician-geneticist directly involved in the diagnosis of genetic diseases and the care of patients with such diseases. 

Other fields of human genetics such as population genetics, genetic epidemiology, developmental genetics, and immunogenetics also have medical relevance, especially in relation to the understanding and prevention of human disease.

In addition to clinical practice, medical genetics is applied to the care of patients in the fields of genetic counseling, population screening to identify persons at risk of developing or transmitting a genetic disorder, and prenatal diagnosis.
Genetic counseling, which combines the provision of risk information with a support function, is maturing into a new health profession. 
Population screening for genetic disease has become an important public health initiative.
Prenatal diagnosis, which makes use of many clinical and laboratory specialties in addition to genetics, is probably today the chief area in which genetics is applied to patient care.

Although it has always been most closely associated with pediatrics, medical genetics is also relevant to many other clinical specialties.
In obstetrics, prenatal diagnosis of certain genetic defects has become a standard aspect of prenatal care. 
In adult medicine, it is recognized that many common disorders, such as coronary artery disease, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus, have important genetic components and that preventive medicine could be much more effective if it could be directed toward special genetically defined high-risk groups rather than toward the general population.
Applications to many other fields, especially neurology, hematology, and oncology, are referred to in later chapters.

Although much of medical genetics is within the medical mainstream, genetics is unlike other medical specialties in that it is often oriented to prevention as well as to treatment and in that its focus is often not only the patient but the entire family.

Ethical Principles in Medical Genetics 

The principles of medical ethics apply to genetics as to other medical disciplines, but some of the ethical dilemmas that can arise in medical genetics are rarely if ever seen in other branches of clinical practice.
One type of difficulty is created by physicians' growing ability to perform presymptomatic testing-that is, to identify a disease-causing gene in a person before the condition has become clinically expressed.
Physicians can also now recognize certain genetic predispositions associated with an additional risk of developing a particular disease; for example, they are aware that people with an inherited deficiency of alpha1-antitrypsin (see Table 1-1) have an increased risk of lung disease, especially pronounced in smoky environments. 

Huntington disease (HD; also listed in Table 1-1) is a neuropsychiatric disorder with onset in midlife, inherited from an affected parent as an autosomal dominant.
In many cases, geneticists can determine, long before the disease becomes manifest, whether a relative of a patient with HD has inherited the gene. 
As described in Chapters 4 and 8, the test requires analysis of DNA markers close to the HD gene, in blood samples from family members.
However, if presymptomatic testing is to be done, the patient must give consent to have his or her relatives informed about the diagnosis and its implications for them and their families, and the relatives must agree to provide blood samples for analysis. 
Each member has the right to make an informed decision whether to participate in the study, without coercion and after receiving full information from the physician or genetic counselor about the implications of the decision.

Participants have a right not to Know whether they are at risk, and in some circumstances this right is in conflict with the right of other family members to have such information.
Confidentiality, a cardinal principle of medical ethics, can be especially difficult to maintain when one is dealing with presymptomatic testing on related persons. 
Family members who have agreed to participate in providing blood samples may find it difficult to understand why they are not entitled to access to one another's test results.
Moreover, testing can provide unexpected information; for example, it can reveal cases of nonpaternity.
Identification of nonpaternity raises the additional question of whether the person who provided the sample wants to receive such information, and it emphasizes the fact that the possibility of such an eventuality should be dealt with beforehand and covered in the consent form that each participant is asked to sign.
These brief examples illustrate some of the difficulties that are encountered in predictive testing for genetic disease (Huggins et al., 1990).

CLASSIFICATION OF GENETIC DISORDERS 

In clinical practice, the chief significance of genetics is its role in the causation of a large number of disorders. 
Virtually any disease is the result of the combined action of genes and environment, but the relative role of the genetic component may be large or small.

Among disorders caused wholly or partly by genetic factors, three main types are recognized:

1. Single-gene disorders
2. Chromosome disorders
3. Multifactorial disorders

Single-gene defects are caused by mutant genes.
The mutation may be present on only one chromosome of a pair (matched with a normal allele on the homologous chromosome) or on both chromosomes of the pair.
In either case, the cause is a single critical error in the genetic information. 

Such disorders usually exhibit obvious and characteristic pedigree patterns.
Most such defects are rare, with a frequency that may be as high as 1 in 500 but is usually mach less (Tabla 1-1).
However, there are many different kinds; about 4000 single-gene phenotypes, some 3000 of which are genetic disorders, have been described (McKusick, 1990), and their combined impact is significant.
In several hundred of these diseases, the basic biochemical defect has been recognized, and in many the affected gene has been isolated and cloned (Beaudet et al., 1989).

Table 1-1

Selected Examples of Significant Genetic Disorders

Disorder.
significance.


Single-Gene Disorders .
Adenosine deaminase deficiency .
Autosomal recessive enzyme defect that causes immunodeficiency; first condition to be approved for human gene therapy.


Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Autosomal recessive deficiency of a major plasma protease inhibitor, leading to obstructive lung disease in homozygotes (more severe in smokers) and liver disease in some affected children.


Cystic fibrosis.
Common autosomal recessive disorder affecting regulation of membrane transport of ions in exocrine cells; first gene to be identified without prior knowledge of gene product or structural chromosomal aberration.


Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Common X-linked recessive disorder of muscle; gene identified by structural chromosomal aberration without prior knowledge ofprotein product; very large gene that is thus a frequent target for mutation.


Familial hypercholesterolemia.
Autosomal dominant defect of receptor for plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL); associated with an increased frequency of coronary artery disease .


Fragile X syndrome.
Common form of X-linked mental retardation, associated with fragile site on X chromosome; unique genetic features; ~1/3 of carrier females show mild retardation.


Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
Pharmacogenetic disorder; X-linked; many variants but two are common, one in Mediterranean, one in Africa; heterozygote advantage due to resistance to malaria .


Hemophilia A.
Common X-linked coagulation defect.


Huntington disease .
Neurodegenerative disease, classic autosomal dominant of late onset, predictable by molecular testing at presymptomatic stage, first geneto be localized to a chromosome by DNA linkage analysis.


Myotonic dystrophy.
Autosomal dominant, variable onset age and severity; maternal effect: patients with congenital onset typically have affected mothers.


Neurofibromatosis type I.
Common autosomal dominant disorder with variable expression, high mutation rate, risk of malignancy; high proportion of new mutations (~ 50%); very large gene.


Osteogenesis imperfecta.
Heterogeneous group of molecular defects of collagen; the prototypes of defects in structural proteins .


Phenylketonuria.
Autosomal recessive deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase, can cause mental retardation; prototype of diseases that can be detected by neonatal screening, with prevention of retardation by prompt dietary treatment Retinoblastoma.


Retinoblastoma .
Embryonic neoplasm of retina, associated with mutation or deletion of a pair of alleles on chromosome 13; both inherited and sporadic forms.


Sickle cell anemia .
Defect in gene for p-globin chain of hemoglobin; first molecular disease to be identified; common in Africa; high frequency related to heterozygote advantage due to malaria resistance .


Tay-Sachs disease.
Autosomal recessive deficiency of hexosaminidase A; very common in Ashkenazi Jewish population.


Thalassemia.
Numerous defects of gene for either a- or B-globin chain of hemoglobin, leading to imbalance in relative amounts of the chains; very common in Mediterranean and Southern Asia.


Wilms tumor.
Renal tumor of childhood, associated with deletion of chromosome llpl3; may be part of contiguous gene syndrome with aniridia, genitourinary problems, and retardation (WAGR syndrome); normal allele involved in development of urogenital system.


Cytogenetic Disorders .
Down syndrome.
Trisomy 21, most common cause of moderate mental retardation; risk related to late maternal age.


Trisomy 18.
Extra autosome with characteristic phenotype of severe, multiple congenital malformations in liveborn infants.


Trisomy 13.
Extra autosome with characteristic phenotype of severe, multiple congenital malformations in liveborn infants .


Klinefelter syndrome.
Male phenotype and characteristic abnormalities, usually associated with 47,XXY karyotype.


Turner syndrome .
Female phenotype and characteristic abnormalities, usually associated with 45,X karyotype.


XXX syndrome.
Common abnormal karyotype; may be associated with learning difficulties and infertility; often phenotypically normal.


XYY syndrome.
Common abnormal karyotype; may be associated with behavioral difficulties; often phenotypically normal.


Prader-Willi syndrome.
Dysmorphic syndrome with obesity and cognitive impairment, example of genomic imprinting, often due to cytogenetic deletion of chromosome 15qll-ql3 on the paternally inherited chromosome.


Multifactorial Disorders .
Congenital Malformations.
Cleft lip with or without cleft palate.
Cleft of lip, with or without cleft palate, unilateral or bilateral.


Congenital heart diseases.
Group of congenital heart defects, some partly genetic.


Neural tube defects.
Anencephaly, spina bifida, and less common forms.


Adult Diseases.
Cancer, some forms.
Role of heredity in many forms of cancer incompletely understood but often of major importance.


Coronary artery disease.
Disorder with multiple causes, including genetic predisposition.


Diabetes mellitus.
Failure of insulin production by beta cells of pancreas; certain human leukocyte antigen genes are major determinants of risk.


Mitochondrial Disorders .
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy .
First disease demonstrated to be due to a defect in the mitochondrial genome; maternally inherited.


The role of mitochondrial, as well as nuclear, genes as causes of disease is now recognized, and a defect in a mitochondrial gene has be en identified in several disorders, including Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.
Mitochondrially transmitted diseases must therefore be recognized as a special type of single-gene disorder.

In chromosome disorders , the defect is due not to a single mistake in the genetic blueprint but to an excess or deficiency of the genes contained in whole chromosomes or chromosome segments.

For example, the presence of an extra copy of one chromosome, chromosome 21, produces a specific disorder, Down syndrome (Table 1-1), even though no individual gene on the chromosome is abnormal. 
As a group, chromosome disorders are quite common, affecting about 7 of 1000 liveborn infants and accounting for about half of all spontaneous first-trimester abortions.

Multifactorial inheritance is responsible for a number of developmental disorders resulting in congenital malformations and for many common disorders of adult life.
Again, there appears to be no single error in the genetic information, but rather a combination of small variations that together can produce or predispose to a serious defect.
Environmental factors may also be involved.
Multifactorial disorders tend to recur in families but do not show the characteristic pedigree patterns of single-gene traits.

How Can a Physician Recognize that a Disorder Is Genetic?

One of the ironic characteristics of genetic disease is that affected persons usually seek out, not a geneticist, but rather a primary care physician.
Because patients do not come in complaining that "my genes are killing me!" or that "I have a pain in my genes," the primary care physician must recognize that the symptoms have or may have a genetic explanation and must refer the patient to a geneticist's care.
Thus it is the responsibility of primary care physicians to recognize the first clinical signs of genetic disease and to ask themselves, as a matter of routine, whether genetics has a role.
This is what is meant by the genetic approach to medicine or by "genetic medicine."

If a disorder appears more than once in a family, it may have a genetic cause, and one of the purposes of this textbook is to describe ways to identify the various patterns of genetic disease in families.
However, not all disorders that affect more than one member of a family are genetic, and not all genetic disorders affect more than one member of a family.
How can the practicing physician recognize that a disorder in a given patient is genetic in nature, with all that such recognition implies for the patient and family members?

There is no simple answer to this question.
One major clue is, of course, the diagnosis.
Even though many genetic disorders lack specific diagnostic tests, the task of diagnosis is facilitated today by the many excellent descriptions of genetic disorders in the medical literature.
Computer software is also contributing to genetic diagnosis, particularly to the diagnosis of dysmorphic syndromes.

To illustrate the variety of genetic problems that a physician might face, the accompanying box contains four brief histories of patients with relatively common genetic disorders.
Each of the conditions is discussed in further detail elsewhere in the text.

PATTERNS OF SINGLE-GENE INHERITANCE 

In Chapter 1 the three main categories of genetic disorders-single-gene, chromosomal, and multifactorial-were named and briefly characterized. 
In this chapter the classical patterns of transmission of single-gene disorders are discussed in further detail, and some noteworthy exceptions to the usual patterns are described. 

Single-gene traits are often called Mendelian because, like the characteristics of garden peas studied by Gregor Mendel, they segregate within families and, on the average, occur in fixed proportions among the offspring of specific types of matings.
The single-gene phenotypes described so far are listed in Victor A. McKusick's classic reference, Mendelian Inheritance in Man (9th edition, 1990), which has been indispensable to medical geneticists for many years.
The 1990 edition of this book lists more than 4500 loci, and at many of these there is at least one known mutant form that is associated with a clinically significant disorder. 

Thus of the estimated total of 50,000 to 100,000 human genes, approximately 5 percent to 10 percent have already been identified.
The pace of new discovery is high, and it seems certain to accelerate because of international interest and activity in mapping and sequencing of the entire human genome. 

Inherited variation in the genome is the cornerstone of human and medical genetics.
Alternative forms of genetic information at a particular locus are called alleles. 

Many genes have only one normal version, which we call the "wild-type" allele.
Other gene loci exhibit polymorphism (literally, "many forms"),meaning that in the population there are at least two relatively common normal alleles at the locus (see Chapter 6).
In addition to the normal allele or alleles, most identified loci also have one or more rare alleles; in fact, many human loci were originally identified through a clinically significant disorder caused by a rare mutant allele.

The genotype of a person is his or her genetic constitution, either collectively at all loci or, more typically, at a single locus.
The phenotype is the observable expression of a genotype as a morphological, biochemical, or molecular trait.
A phenotype may, of course, be either normal or abnormal in a given individual, but in this bock, which emphasizes disorders of medical significance, the focus is on abnormal phenotypes-that is, genetic disorders.

A single-gene disorder is one that is determined by a specific allele at a single locus on one or both members of a chromosome pair.
The variant allele, which arose by mutation at some time in the recent or remote past and is usually relatively rare, replaces a normal wild-type allele on one or both chromosomes. 
When a person has a pair of identical alleles, he or she is said to be homozygous (a homozygote ); when the alleles are different, he or she is heterozygous (a heterozygote or carrier).

The term compound , or compound heterozygote, is used to describe a genotype in which two different mutant alleles are present, rather than one normal and one mutant.
These terms (homozygous, heterozygous, and compound) can be applied either to a person or to a genotype.
The term mutation is used in medical genetics in two senses: sometimes to indicate a new genetic change that has not been previously known in a kindred and sometimes merely to indicate an abnormal allele.

Single-gene disorders are characterized by their patterns of transmission in families.
To establish the pattern of transmission, a usual first step is to obtain information about the family history of the patient and to summarize the details in the form of a pedigree , using standard symbols (Fig. 4 -1).
The patterns shown by single-gene disorders in pedigrees depend chiefly on two factors: (1) the chromosomal location of the gene locus, which may be autosomal (located on an autosome) or X-linked (located on the X chromosome) and (2) whether the phenotype is dominant (expressed even when only one chromosome of a pair carries the variant allele) or recessive (expressed only when both chromosomes of a pair carry a variant allele).
Thus there are only four basic patterns of single-gene inheritance: xxx .

Autosomal and X-linked inheritance 

The distinction between autosomal and X-linked inheritance is obvious, as it depends solely on the chromosomal location of the gene.
However, the clinical expression of an abnormal gene also depends on whether it is autosomal or X-linked.

There are two considerations, which are discussed in more detail later: (1) Males have only a single X and are therefore said to be hemizygous with respect to X-linked genes, rather than homozygous or heterozygous; 46,XY males are never heterozygous for X-linked traits. (2) To compensate for the double complement of X-linked genes in females, as opposed to the single complement in males, alleles on only one of the two X chromosomes are expressed in any given cell of a female, whereas both alleles of any autosomal locus are active.

Dominant and Recessive Inheritance 

By formal definition, a phenotype expressed in the same way in both homozygotes and heterozygotes is dominant , and a phenotype expressed only in homozygotes (or, for X-linked traits, hemizygotes) is recessive .
In medical genetics, however, this definition does not strictly hold, and any phenotype expressed in heterozygotes is classified as dominant.
Autosomal dominant disorders are typically more severe in homozygotes than in heterozygotes, and so far only one such disorder, Huntington disease, is known to be equally severe in both genotypes.
When the expression of the heterozygous genotype is different from both homozygous types and intermediate between them, the phenotype may be described more precisely as incompletely dominant or incompletely recessive. 
If expression of each allele can be detected even in the presence of the other, the two alleles are termed codominant .

Each of the genetic disorders discussed in this book as an example of a genetic principle is described briefly from a clinical and genetic standpoint at an appropriate place in the text, often in a box.
Refer to Table 1-1 and the index for information about where to find many of these clinical descriptions. 

Strictly speaking, it is the phenotype rather than the allele that is dominant or recessive; however, genes are classified as dominant or recessive on the basis of their phenotypic expression, and the terms "dominant gene" and "recessive gene" are widely, if loosely, used.

The distinction between dominant and recessive inheritance is not absolute; rather, it is an arbitrary designation, based on clinical phenotypes, that may be without significance at the level of gene action.
For autosomal loci, each allele is expressed as a gene product; in heterozygotes, one of the alleles may be deleted, or its product may be defective and ultimately nonfunctional, but wherever it is biologically possible, both alleles are expressed, and the phenotype is the consequence of their combined expression.
Although a recessive phenotype is defined as being clinically undetectable in heterozygotes, many traits classified as recessive do have heterozygous manifestations when examined at the cellular, biochemical, or molecular level. 

- Male
- Female
- Sex unspecified
- Number of children of sex indicated
- Affected
- Heterozygotes for autosomal trait
- Carrier of X-linked recessive trait
- Proband
- Deceased individual
- Prenatal death
- Miscarriage
- Adopted into a family
- Adopted out a family
- Marriage
- Extramarital mating
- Divorce
- Consanguineous mating
- Monozygotic twins
- Dizygotic twins
- Twins of unknown zygosity
- Numbering individuals in pedigrees
- Proband is il-2
- No offspring

Figure 4-1

Symbols commonly used in pedigree charts

56 PATTERNS OF SINGLE-GENE INHERITANCE

For example, the well-known disorder of hemoglobin, sickle cell disease (or anemia), is inherited as an autosomal recessive disease (see Chapter 11 for further discussion).
Patients with the disease are homozygous for a defective allele at the ,B-globin locus and consequently produce the abnormal hemoglobin S (Hb S) rather than normal adult hemoglobin (Hb A) in their red cells, which become sickle-shaped under conditions of low oxygen tension.
Heterozygotes produce both Hb A and Hb S, a proportion of their red cells show the sickling phenomenon, and they have mild anemia.
Thus at the level of hemoglobin synthesis, the normal, B-globin allele and the defective allele are expressed as codominant alleles; at the level of physiological function, the normal allele is incompletely dominant (and the abnormal allele incompletely recessive); and at the clinical level, sickle cell disease behaves as a recessive trait.

In autosomal dominant disorders, the product of the normal allele is typically one that is required in a normal amount; a mutant gene that produces no protein, a reduced amount of protein, or protein in an abnormal form results in the abnormal phenotype. 
Broadly speaking, the normal gene product is often a nonenzymatic structural protein, such as collagen, or a protein component of a membrane or receptor; thus far, however, in the vast majority of autosomal dominant disorders, the nature of the defective or missing protein is still completely unknown. 
In contrast, many of the autosomal recessive disorders described to date are enzyme defects, in which there appears to be a margin of safety wide enough to allow normal function in heterozygotes even though only one of a pair of alleles is fully functional and the other (abnormal) allele is defective or nonfunctional.

These considerations are discussed in detail in Chapter 12.

In summary, the distinction between a dominant and a recessive mutant allele is really a simple one: in the heterozygote, with one normal and one mutant allele, is the residual amount of gene product sufficient to perform its designed function? If the answer is yes, the mutant allele (and its associated disorder) is recessive. 
If the answer is no, the mutant allele (and its disorder) is dominant.

Other Factors Affecting Pedigree Patterns 

Although as a general rule pedigrees of single-gene disorders can be readily classified as autosomal or X-linked and as dominant or recessive, the inheritance pattern of an individual pedigree is also determined by a number of other factors that may make the mode of inheritance difficult to interpret.
Especially with the small family size typical of most developed countries today, the patient may be the only affected family member, and the genetic nature of the disorder may not be immediately apparent. 
Some other points to keep in mind are the chance segregation of genes from parents to children through the gametes; new mutation, which is not infrequent in some types of genetic disease; diagnostic difficulties due to absent or variable expression of the gene concerned; possible effects of other genes and of environment on gene expression; failure of persons of some genotypes to survive to the time of birth; and lack of accurate information about the presence of the disorder in relatives or about family relationships. 

As described in the section "Nonclassical Patterns of Single-Gene Expression," a number of rare and unusual biological mechanisms can lead to nonclassical pedigree patterns.
Examples of some of the situations that can confound attempts to provide accurate genetic counseling are given in the problems at the end of this chapter.

Sometimes a pedigree pattern simulates a single-gene pattern even though the disorder does not have a single-gene basis.
It is easy to be misled in this way by conditions that exhibit multifactorial inheritance, by certain types of familial chromosomal disorders, or by teratogenic effects.
Inherited single-gene disorders can be distinguished from other types of familial disorders by their typical Mendelian segregation ratios within kindreds and by a number of other approaches, of which the most critical is the demonstration of a single defect at the level of the gene product or at the level of DNA that accounts for the phenotype. 

Many patients with genetic disorders have no similarly affected relatives, but even if a genetic disorder occurs in only one member of a family group, it may still be possible to recognize that it is genetic.
Because of the remarkable similarity of phenotype among different families with the same defect, well-established patterns of inheritance in other families with the same disorder can often be used as a basis for diagnosis and counseling (McKusick, 1990).

Heterogeneity

When a genetic disorder that appears to be a single entity is thoroughly analyzed, it is frequently found to be genetically heterogeneous; that is, it includes a number of phenotypes that are similar but are actually determined by different genotypes (see Table 4-1 for examples).
Heterogeneity may be the result of different mutations at the same locus ( allelic heterogeneity ), mutations at different loci ( nonallelic or locus heterogeneity ), or both.
Recognition of genetic heterogeneity is an important aspect of clinical diagnosis and genetic counseling.

For many phenotypes, pedigree analysis alone has been sufficient to demonstrate genetic heterogeneity.
For example, retinitis pigmentosa , a common cause of visual impairment due to retinal degeneration associated with abnormal pigment distribution in the retina, has long been known to occur in autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked forms.
In recent years the heterogeneity has been shown to be even more extensive; DNA analysis has demonstrated that there are at least two X-linked and three autosomal dominant forms.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome , in which there are numerous manifestations of an underlying defect of collagen structure, may also have autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked inheritance, and analysis at the clinical and molecular levels has shown that there are at least 10 distinct types of the disorder.

Allelic heterogeneity is an important cause of clinical variation.
Many loci possess more than one mutant allele; in fact, at a given locus there may be several or many mutations, resulting in clinically indistinguishable or closely similar disorders.
In other cases, different mutant alleles at the same locus result in very different clinical presentations. 

A classical example of allelic heterogeneity as the basis of clinical heterogeneity is the autosomal recessive disorder Hurler syndrome , a mucopolysaccharidosis resulting from deficiency of the enzyme or-L-iduronidase.
A milder allelic disorder, Scheie syndrome , results from a different mutation at the same locus, and a phenotype of intermediate severity, Hurler-Scheie syndrome , is seen in patients with the compound genotype (see also Table 12-4).

Unless they have consanguineous parents, many people with autosomal recessive disorders probably have compound rather than truly homozygous genotypes, although for most purposes the y are still usually referred to as homozygotes if they have a pair of abnormal alleles.
Because different allelic combinations may have somewhat different clinical consequences, clinicians need to be aware of allelic heterogeneity as one possible explanation for variability among patients considered to have the same disease. 

The Burden of Mendelian Disorders The known Mendelian diseases exact a heavy cost in reproductive failure, premature death, and social handicap.
They are primarily, but by no means exclusively, disorders of the pediatric age range; fewer than 10 percent develop after puberty, and only 1 percent occur after the end of the reproductive period (Costa et al., 1985).
Although individually rare, as a group they are responsible for a significant proportion of childhood diseases and deaths.
In a population study of more than 1 million live births, the incidence of serious single-gene disorders was estimated to be 0.36 percent (Baird et al., 1988).
In another study of liveborn and stillborn infants, 1 in 45 had some type of congenital anomaly; of the anomalies, about 1 in 30 appeared to be single-gene disorders, and about 1 in 4 of the single-gene disorders were thought to be new mutations (Nelson and Holmes, 1989).
Among hospitalized children, 6 percent to 8 percent probably have single-gene disorders (Beaudet et al., 1989).

Table 4-1

Heterogeneity in Selected Single-Gene Disorders

Disorder.
Type of Heterogeneity.
comments.


Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease .
Locus (nonallelic).
AD, XR forms.


Cystic fibrosis.
Allelic.
Pancreatic insufficiency vs. sufficiency.


Deafness, recessive congenital .
Both allelic and locus.
Numerous types described.


Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy.
Allelic.
Clinically distinct .


Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Both allelic and locus.
Many distinct variants.


Homocystinuria.
Both allelic and locus.
vitamin responsive vs. nonresponsive.


Mucopolysaccharidoses.
Both allelic and locus.
Extensive heterogeneity.


Myotonia congenita .
Locus.
AD, AR forms.


Retinitis pigmentosa.
Locus.
AD, AR, and XR forms.


Tay-Sachs disease.
Allelic.
Several forms.


B-thalessemia .
Allelic.
Numerous different mutations in ,B-globin gene produce the phenotype.


Terminology

Even though the principles of medical genetics are relatively easy to understand, the unfamiliar terminology may make the subject seem inaccessible at first.
To help solve the language problem, some terms not previously defined are introduced here and illustrated by the pedigree in Figure 4-2.

The member through whom a family with a genetic disorder is first brought to attention (ascertained) is the proband (propositus), or if affected may be called the index case .
The proband is usually a patient but may be some other member of the family.
A family may have more than one proband, if it is ascertained through more than one source.
Brothers and sisters are called sibs or siblings, and a family of sibs forms a sibship .
The first-generation offspring of a mating constitute the F1 (first filial generation). 
Relatives are classified as first-degree (parents, sibs, and offspring of the proband), second-degree (grandparents and grandchildren, uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces, half-sibs), third-degree (first cousins, for example), and so forth, depending on the number of steps (in other words, the number of meioses) in the pedigree between the two relatives.
The offspring of first cousins are second cousins, and a child is a "first cousin once removed" of his or her parents' first cousins.
Couples who are related by descent are consanguineous .
If there is only one affected member in a family, he or she is an "isolated" case or, if the disorder is determined to be due to new mutation, a "sporadic" case (Fig., 4-2).

Figure 4-2.
Relationships within a kindred.
Arrow indicates the proband ,111-5, who represents an isolated case of a genetic disorder.
She has four sibs , 111-3, 111-4,111-7, and 111-8.
Her partner/spouse is 111-6, and they have three children (their F1 progeny).

The proband has nine first-degree relatives (her parents, siblings, and offspring), nine second-degree relatives (grandparents, uncles/aunts, nieces/nephews, grandchildren), two third-degree relatives (first cousins), and four fourth-degree relatives (first cousins once removed).
IV-3, IV-5 and IV-6 are second cousins of IV-I and IV-2.
IV-7 and IV-8, whose parents are consanguineous , are doubly related to the proband: second-degree relatives through their father and fourth-degree relatives through their mother.

TOOLS OF HUMAN MOLECULAR GENETICS 

One of the foremost aims of modern medical and human genetics is to understand at a molecular level the basis for mutations that lead to genetic disease and to use that information to improve methods of diagnosis and potential treatment for those genetic diseases.
These studies rely on the concepts of molecular genetics, which reflect a logical extension of concepts firmly rooted in cytogenetics, clinical genetics, and biochemical genetics. 

Like most advances in understanding, those in molecular genetics have been aided considerably by the development of key methodological and technological approaches that could hardly have been imagined even as late as the mid-1970s.
The methods, if not the concepts, of molecular genetics have indeed been revolutionary.
In the past 15 years, a number of techniques that permit the detailed analysis of both normal and abnormal genes were developed and used.
The application of these techniques has both increased the understanding of molecular processes at all levels, from the gene to the whole organism, and provided the basis for a growing armamentarium of laboratory procedures for the detection and diagnosis of genetic diseases. 

This chapter is not intended to be a "cook-book" of recipes for genetic experiments or of laboratory diagnostic methods. 
Rather, it serves only as an introduction to the techniques that have been and continue to be largely responsible for advances in both basic and applied genetic research.

The contents of this chapter both supplement the basic material presented in Chapters 2, 3, and 4 and provide a basis for understanding much of the molecular information contained in the chapters that follow.
For readers who have had a course in molecular human genetics or who have had laboratory experience in molecular genetics, this chapter can be skimmed or even omitted altogether without interfering with the continuity of the text.
For others who find the material in this chapter too brief, far more detailed accounts of modern techniques, along with complete references, can be found in the General References listed at the end of this chapter.

PRINCIPLES OF MOLECULAR CLONING

The process of molecular cloning involves isolating a DNA sequence of interest and obtaining multiple copies of it in an organism, usually a bacterium, that is capable of growth over extended periods.
Large quantities of the DNA molecule can be then isolated in pure form for detailed molecular analysis (Fig., 5-1).
The ability to generate virtually endless copies (clones) of a particular sequence is the basis of recombinant DNA technology and its application to human and medical genetics.
The name "recombinant DNA" refers to novel combinations of DNA created between human (or other) DNA sequences of interest and bacterial (or other) DNA molecules capable of indefinite duplication in the laboratory.
Like many technological advances, this one comes with its own jargon, the mastery of which may seem more imposing than the concepts involved (see box).

Restriction Enzymes

One of the key advances in the development of molecular cloning was the discovery in the early 1970s of bacterial restriction endonucleases , enzymes that recognize specific (usually short) double-stranded sequences in DNA and cleave the DNA at or near the recognition site.
For example, the restriction enzyme Eco RI recognizes the specific six base-pair sequence xxx , wherever it occurs in a double-stranded DNA molecule and cleaves the DNA at that site by introducing a nick on each strand between the G and the adjacent A.
This generates two fragments, each with a four-base, single-stranded overhang at the end (Fig., 5 - 2).
Such "sticky" ends are useful for subsequent joining reactions in the construction of recombinant DNA molecules.
Other restriction enzymes recognize different sequences of nucleotides that are specific for each particular enzyme.
Several hundred such enzymes are now known; some of the ones most commonly used are listed in Table 5-1.
Most restriction enzymes have recognition sites that consist of four or six base pairs, although a few have longer sites.
Usually, the sequences are palindromes ; that is, they read the same 5' to 3' on both strands.

Cleavage of a DNA molecule with a particular restriction enzyme digests the DNA into a characteristic and reproducible collection of fragments, which reflect the frequency and the location of specific cleavage sites.
This property of restriction enzymes has two important implications central to their role in recombinant DNA technology and its application to medical genetics.
First, digestion of genomic DNA samples with, for example, the enzyme Eco RI generates a collection of approximately 1 million Eco RI fragments, each from a particular location in the genome. 
Because Eco RI cleaves double-stranded DNA specifically at each and every xxx that it encounters and because even a single base change in a potential cleavage site abolishes its recognition and cleavage by the enzyme, such digestion allows one to examine, in effect, this particular sequence of six nucleotides at approximately 1 million locations in the genome. (On average, an enzyme with a 6 base-pair recognition site should cleave human DNA every 46 base pairs, or once every 4 kb.
However, in reality, such sites are located nonrandomly, reflecting the particular base composition and sequence of different regions of the genome, and Eco RI fragments ranging in size from a few base pairs to well over 1 million base pairs are observed.)

Figure 5-1

The rationale for molecular cloning to isolate infinite quantities of a particular desired DNA sequence in pure form

The language of molecular Cloning

cDNA (complementary DNA): a synthetic DNA copied from messenger RNA (mRNA) by the enzyme reverse transcriptase. 
Used to refer to either a single- stranded copy or its double-stranded derivative.
Usage: "a cDNA clone," "a cDNA library," or "to isolate a cDNA."

Clone: a recombinant DNA molecule containing a gene or other DNA sequence of interest.
Also, the act of generating such a molecule.
Usage: "to isolate a clone" or "to clone a gene."

Host: the organism used to isolate and propagate a recombinant DNA molecule.
Usually a strain of the bacterium Escherichia coli or the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Usage: "What host did they use?"

Hybridization: the act of two complementary single-stranded nucleic acid molecules forming bonds and becoming a double-stranded molecule.
Usage: "The probe hybridized to a gene."

Insert: a fragment of human DNA cloned into a particular vector.
Usage: "They purified the insert."

library: a collection of recombinant clones from a source known to contain the gene, cDNA, or other DNA sequences of interest. 
In principle, a library may contain all the DNA sequences represented in the original cell, tissue, or chromosome.
Usage: "a muscle cDNA library" or "a human genomic library." 

Ligation: the act of forming phosphodiester bonds to join two double- stranded DNA molecules with the enzyme DNA ligase. 
Ligation is the essential step in creating recombinant DNA molecules.
Usage: "The fragments were ligated together." 

Probe: a cloned DNA or RNA molecule, labeled with radioactivity or another detectable tracer, used to identify its complementary sequences by molecular hybridization; also, the act of using such a molecule.
Usage: "the ,B- globin probe" or "to probe a patient's DNA."

restriction endonuclesses (restriction enzymes): enzymes that recognize specific double-stranded DNA sequences and cleave the DNA at or near the recognition site.
Usage: "a restriction enzyme digest" (or just "a restriction digest") or "the restriction enzyme EcoRI."

Southern blot: a filter to which DNA has been transferred, usually after restriction enzyme digestion and gel electrophoresis to separate DNA molecules by size (named after the developer of the technique, Ed Southern); also, the act of generating such a filter and hybridizing it to a specific probe.
Usage: "to probe a Southern blot" or "they did a Southern."

vector: the DNA molecule into which the gene or other DNA fragment of interest is cloned, capable of replicating in a particular host.
Examples include plasmids, bacteriophage lambda, cosmids, and yeast artificial chromosomes.
Usage: "a cloning vector" or "the cosmid vector."

Second, all DNA molecules digested with Eco RI, regardless of their origin, have identical single-stranded sticky ends, independent of the nature of the DNA sequences flanking a particular Eco RI site.
Therefore, any two DNA molecules that have been generated by Eco RI digestion can be joined together by interaction of their complementary four-base overhangs, which is followed by completion of the phosphodiester backbones on each strand by an enzyme called DNA ligase .
This ligation step creates a "recombinant" DNA molecule, one end derived from one DNA source and the other end derived from a different source (Fig., 5-2).
Many restriction enzymes, such as EcoRI, generate short overhangs; others, however, cut both strands at the same location, leaving blunt ends.
DNA ligase can also join these molecules.

Figure 5-2

The process of cloning a segment of human DNA (between two Eco RI sites) into a plasmid cloning vector

"Ori" denotes an origin of DNA replication for replicating the plasmid in bacterial cells. "ampr" and "tetr" denote bacterial genes conferring resistance to ampicillin and tetracycline.

Growth of bacteria on plates containing antibiatics selects for those cells that contain copies of the plasmid, with its cloned human insert.

(Modified from Fritsch EF, Maniatis T [1987] Methods of molecular genetics.
In Stamatoyannopoulos G, Nienhuis AW, Leder P,Majerus PW (eds) The molecular basis of blood diseases.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp., I-27.) 

Vectors

A vector is a DNA molecule that can replicate autonomously in a host such as bacterial or yeast cells, from which it can be subsequently isolated in pure form for analysis.
Cloning of human DNA fragments into a vector by means of restriction enzymes and DNA ligase, as just described, allows for the propagation of the cloned fragment along with the vector molecule.
Because replicating vectors can achieve a high number of copies per cell and because the bacterial or yeast hosts can be grown indefinitely in the laboratory, vast quantities of the DNA sequences of interest can be obtained.
A number of vectors are commonly used for this purpose, each with its own set of advantages and limitations (Table 5-2).

Table 5-1

Examples of Restriction Enzymes and Their Recognition Sequences

Restriction Enzyme.
Source.


BamHI.
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens H.


EcoRI.
Eschenchia coli RY 13.


HaeIII.
Haemophilus aegyptius.


HindIII.
Haemophilus influenzae Rd.


NotI.
Nocardia of otitidis-cavarium.


Sau3A.
Staphylococcus aureus 3A.


SstII.
Streptomyces stanford.


PLASMIDS

Plasmids are circular double-stranded DNA molecules that replicate extrachromosomally in bacteria or, less commonly, in yeast.
Because they can be maintained in a moderate number of copies (Fig., 5-1), they are ideal for generating large quantities of a cloned DNA sequence.
Plasmids specifically designed for molecular cloning are usually small (several kb in size) and contain an origin of replication (for replication either in E. coli or in yeast), one or more selectable markers (usually a gene that confers resistance to antibiotics), and one or more restriction sites for cloning foreign DNA molecules. 
A schematic drawing of the important steps involved in cloning of foreign DNA into the Eco RI site of a plasmid is shown in Figure 5-2.
Identification of colonies that contain the desired recombinant plasmid, followed by mass growth and isolation of pure plasmid DNA, allows the isolation of large amounts of the cloned insert.
Cloning into plasmids is a standard procedure for the analysis of short DNA molecules (Table 5-2).

BACTERIOPHAGE LAMBDA

Another commonly used vector is bacteriophage lambda, a bacterial virus with a relatively large (approximately 45 kb) double-stranded DNA molecule.

During growth in E. coli lambda replicates to produce huge numbers of infectious viruses, eventually killing the bacterial cells thus infected and releasing 1 million or so bacteriophages.
During this infectious phase of growth, approximately one third of the bacteriophage genome is nonessential (labeled "internal fragments" in Fig., 5-3) and can be replaced by other DNA sequences; thus it is highly suitable for cloning fairly large (up to about 20 kb) pieces of human DNA.

Table 5-2

Example of Vectors Commonly Used in Molecular Cloning

Vector.
Host.
Type of Cloning .


Plasmids.
Bacterial, yeast .
Genomic, cDNA.


Bacteriophage lambda.
Bacterial.
Genomic, cDNA.


Cosmids.
Bacterial.
Genomic.


"Artificial chromosomes".
Yeast.
Genomic .


Figure 5-3

Construction of a "library" of DNA from the human genome in a bacteriophage vector

Each of the recombinant phage particles at the bottom contains a different fragment of human DNA.
A collection of several hundred thousand such phages would represent all the DNA from the human genome.

COSMIDS

Even larger fragments of foreign DNA (up to about 50 kb) can be cloned in cosmid vectors.
Cosmids are basically plasmids that use the ability of bacteriophage lambda infectious particles to efficiently "package" large linear pieces of DNA and introduce them into bacterial cells, After infection of bacteria in a manner similar to that of a lambda virus, the cosmid recircularizes and replicates as a large plasmid.

YEAST "ARTIFICIAL CHROMOSOMES"

For many approaches to gene cloning and gene mapping, illustrated in Chapter 8, it is advantageous to isolate the largest piece of human chromosomal DNA possible.
Until the mid-1980s, cosmid vectors represented the largest cloning vehicle available. 
In 1987, however, Olson and colleagues developed a technique to clone much larger pieces of DNA into vectors that replicate and segregate in the host Saccharomyces cerevisiae (common baker's yeast), as in normal linear yeast chromosomes (Burke et al., 1987).
These yeast "artificial chromosomes" (YACs) have centromeres and telomeres, just like normal yeast chromosomes, and allow cloning and isolation of fragments of DNA up to 1000 kb in length, much smaller than a normal human chromosome but approximately the same size as a normal yeast chromosome.

Construction of Libraries

The purpose of molecular cloning, of course, is to isolate a particular gene or other DNA sequence in large quantities for further study.
A common approach for achieving this is to construct a set of recombinant DNA clones from a source (genomic DNA or mRNA) that contains the gene or sequence of interest. 
Such a collection of clones is called a library , which at least theoretically contains all of the sequences found in the original source.
Having a library, however, is only the first step.
One then has to identify the clone or clones of interest from the library by using sensitive screening methods that are capable of finding, in some cases, even a single copy of the clone of interest in a collection of up to 10 million starting clones.

GENOMIC LIBRARIES

One approach to constructing a library of genomic DNA is shown in Figure 5-3.
In this technique, first applied in the late 1970s, human genomic DNA is partially digested with a restriction enzyme like Sau 3A in such a way that some of the sites are cleaved and others are not.
In this way, if random cleavage of such sites is assumed, a collection of overlapping fragments of length suitable for cloning ca n be obtained and ligated into bacteriophage lambda "arms" prepared so that the Sau3A ends of human DNA fragments can be ligated into the vector (Fig., 5 - 3).
After packaging of the recombinant lambda chromosome into infectious bacteriophage particles, the library, containing 1 million or more fragments of genomic DNA, can be stored for the future isolation of many genes.
One of the very first human genomic libraries, constructed by Maniatis and colleagues (Lawn et al., 1978), is still being used today in hundreds of laboratories around the world for the isolation of human genes.

One can greatly facilitate the process of screening for the sequence of interest by starting with a library that is already enriched for that sequence, thus considerably reducing the total number of recombinant clones that have to be screened.
For genomic DNA, a particularly efficient way to achieve this is to use a library that contains only clones from a specific human chromosome.
Thus if one wants to isolate a gene from, for example, chromosome 7, a chromosome-specific library representing clones only from chromosome 7 can be obtained.
Such libraries are now available for all individual human chromosomes; these libraries are generated by the cloning of DNA from chromosomes separated on the basis of size from all of the other chromosomes by an approach called fluorescence-activated chromosome sorting .
The applications of this particular approach are explained further in Chapter 8.

CLINICAL CYTOGENETICS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND AUTOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES

A new era in medical genetics opened in 1959 with two virtually simultaneous discoveries: the finding by Lejeune and his colleagues that "enfants mongoliens" (children with mongolism, now known as Down syndrome or trisomy 21) have 47 chromosomes instead of the usual 46 in their somatic cells, and the first observations, by Ford and colleagues and by Jacobs and Strong, of sex chromosome anomalies in patients with disorders of sexual development.
It is now known that chromosome disorders form a major category of genetic disease, accounting for a large proportion of all reproductive wastage, congenital malformations, and mental retardation, as well as playing an important role in the pathogenesis of malignancy. 

Specific chromosome abnormalities are responsible for 60 or more identifiable syndromes, which collectively are more common than all the Mendelian single-gene disorders together (Borgaonkar, 1989).
They are present in an estimated 0.7 percent of live births, in about 2 percent of all pregnancies in women over 35 years old, and in fully 50 percent of all spontaneous first-trimester abortions.

In this chapter we discuss the numerical and structural abnormalities observed in human karyotypes and describe some of the best-known abnormalities of the autosomes.
The sex chromosomes and their abnormalities are presented in the next chapter.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CLINICAL CYTOGENETICS 

Abnormalities of chromosomes may be either numerical or structural and may involve one or more autosomes, sex chromosomes, or both simultaneously.
By far the most common type of clinically significant chromosome abnormality is aneuploidy , an abnormal chromosome number due to an extra or missing chromosome, which is always associated with physical or mental maldevelopment, or both.
Reciprocal translocations (exchange of segments between nonhomologous chromosomes) are also relatively common but usually have no phenotypic effect, although as explained later there may be an associated increased risk of abnormal offspring.
The relative frequencies of numerical and structural abnormalities observed in spontaneous abortions, in fetuses of mothers over 35 years of age that are analyzed in amniocentesis, and in live births are presented in the box.

Some abbreviations commonly used in descriptions of chromosomes and their abnormalities and examples of abnormal karyotypes are listed in Table 9-1.

ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME NUMBER 

A chromosome complement with any chromosome number other than normal is said to be heteroploid .
An exact multiple of the haploid chromosome number (n) is called euploid , and any other chromosome number is aneuploid .

Triploidy and Tetraploidy

In addition to the diploid (2n) number characteristic of normal somatic cells, two other euploid chromosome complements, triploid (3n) and tetraploid (4n), are occasionally reported.
Both triploidy and tetraploidy have been seen in fetuses, and a few triploid infants have been liveborn, though their survival has been brief.
Triploidy probably results from failure of one of the maturation divisions, in either ovum or, usually, sperm.

The phenotypic expression of a triploid karyotype depends on the source of the extra chromosome set; triploids with an extra set of paternal chromosomes typically have an abnormal placenta and are classified as partial hydatidiform moles, but those with an additional set of maternal chromosomes are not so classified and are spontaneously aborted earlier in pregnancy. 
Tetraploids are always xxx or xxx , suggesting that tetraploidy results from failure of completion of an early cleavage division of the zygote.

Aneuploidy

Aneuploidy is the most common and clinically significant type of human chromosome disorder, occurring in at least 3 to 4 percent of all clinically recognized pregnancies.
Although by definition a person is aneuploid if he or she has fewer or more chromosomes than an exact multiple of the haploid set, most aneuploid patients have either trisomy (three instead of the normal pair of a particular chromosome) or, less often, monosomy (only one representative of a particular chromosome).
Either trisomy or monosomy can have severe phenotypic consequences.

Trisomy can exist for any chromosome of the set, but trisomy for a whole chromosome is rarely compatible with life.
By far the most common type of trisomy in liveborn infants is trisomy 21 (karyotype 47,XX or XY,+21), the chromosome constitution seen in 95 percent of patients with Down syndrome (Fig., 9-1).
Monosomy for an entire chromosome is almost always lethal; an important exception is monosomy for the X chromosome, described in Chapter 10.

The causes of aneuploidy are not well understood, but it is known that whatever the underlying molecular mechanism, the most common chromosomal mechanism is meiotic nondisjunction , the failure of a pair of chromosomes to disjoin in the normal way during one of the two meiotic divisions, usually during meiosis I.
The consequences of nondisjunction during meiosis I and meiosis II are different (Fig., 9 - 2).
If the error occurs during meiosis I, the gamete with 24 chromosomes contains both the paternal and the maternal members of the pair.
If it occurs during meiosis II, the gamete with the extra chromosome contains both copies of either the paternal or the maternal chromosome. (However, recombination almost certainly has taken place in the preceding meiosis I, resulting in some genetic differences between the chromatids and thus the corresponding daughter chromosomes; see Chapter 2.)

- Abnormal karyotype
- Total incidence
- Percentage of abnonnalies
- Numerical abnormalities
- (aneuploidy, polyploidy)
- Structural abnormalities
- balanced
- unbalanced

Table 9-1

Some Abbreviations Used for Description of Chromosomes and Their Abnormalities and Representative Example

Abbreviation.
Meaning.
Condition .


Normal female karyotype.
Normal male karyotype.


cen.
del.
centromere.
deletion.
Female with cri du chat syndrome due to deletion of part of short arm of one chromosome 5.


der.
derivative chromosome.
Translocation chromosome derived from chromosome 1 and containing the centromere of chromosome 1.


dic.
dicentric chromosome .
Translocation chromosome containing centromeres from both the X and the Y chromosomes.


dup.
fra.
i.
duplication.
fragile site.
isochromosome.
Male with fragile X chromosome.
Female with isochromosome for the long arm of the X chromosome.


ins.
inv.
mar.
mat.
inser tion.
inversion.
marker chromosome.
maternal origin.
Pericentric inversion of chromosome 3.
Female with an extra, unidentified chromosome.
Male with additional der(1) translocation chromosome inherited from his mother.


p.
pat.
q.
r.
rcp.
rob.
short arm of chromosome.
paternal origin.
long arm of chromosome.
ring chromosome.
reciprocal translocation.
Robertsonian translocation .
Female with ring X chromosome.


t.
translocation.
Female with balanced translocation between.
chromosome 2 and chromosome 8, with breaks in 2q21 and 8pl3.


ter.
terminus.
Female with partial deletion of the long arm from xxx to xxx (nomenclature shows the portion ofthe chromosome that is present).


gains of.
Female with trisomy 21.


loss of.
Normal female carrier of a Robertsonian translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 14 and 21; karyotype is missing a normal 14 and a normal 21.


Chromosome 4 with a portion of the short arm deleted.


break.
Deleted chromosome 5 in a patient with cri du chat syndrome, with a deletion breakpoint in band pl5.


break and join.
Description of der(2) portion of t(2;8).


mosaicism.
Female with two populations of cells, one with a normal karyotype and one with trisomy 8.


Figure 9-1

Chromosome spread from a patient with trisomy 21

Arrows indicate the three copies of chromosome 21.

To determine the parental origin of the error and the meiotic stage at which it occurred, as well as to learn whether an association exists between nondisjunction and recombination, both polymorphic DNA probes spanning the long arm of chromosome 21 and cytogenetic heteromorphisms of the short arm have been used.
As shown in Figure 9 - 3, in many cases analysis of markers on the chromosomes of the parents and the aneuploid patient reveals the stage and parental origin of the error.

More complicated forms of multiple aneuploidy have been reported.
A gamete occasionally has an extra representative of more than one chromosome.
Nondisjunction can take place at two successive meiotic divisions or by chance in both male and female gametes simultaneously, resulting in zygotes with bizarre chromosome numbers, which are extremely rare except for the sex chromosomes.
Nondisjunction can also occur in a mitotic division after formation of the zygote.
If this happens at an early cleavage division, clinically significant mosaicism may result.
In some malignant cell lines and some cell cultures, mitotic nondisjunction can lead to highly abnormal karyotypes.

ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE 

Structural rearrangements result from chromosome breakage, followed by reconstitution in an abnormal combination.
Rearrangement can take place in many ways, all of which are more rare than aneuploidy; the most common type, a balanced translocation (either reciprocal or Robertsonian, to be discussed), is present in about 1 in 500 newborns.
Chromosome exchange occurs spontaneously at a low frequency and may also be induced by breaking agents (clastogens) such as ionizing radiation, some viral infections, and many chemicals.
Like numerical abnormalities, structural rearrangements may be present in all cells of a person or in mosaic form.

Figure 9-2

The different consequences of nondisjunction at meiosis I (left) and meiosis II (right)

If the error occurs at meiosis 1, the gametes either contain a representative of both members of the chromosome 21 pair or lack a chromosome 21 altogether If nondisjunction occurs at meiosis 11, the abnormal gametes contain two copies of one parental chromosome 21 (and no copy of the other) or lack a chromosome 21.

Figure 9-3

Determination of origin of nondisjunction in trisomy 21

In this family, the mother's two chromosome 21s can be distinguished by a chromosomal heteromorphism (see Fig., 6-2).
Her daughter who has Down syndrome had inherited bath of these heteromorphisms, demonstrating that the origin of her extra chromosome 21 is maternal.
The mother and her daughter are heterozygous for the heteromorphism, as well as for two chromosome 21 DNA polymorphisms (loci A and B), demonstrating that the nondisjunction occurred in maternal meiosis I.
Structural rearrangements are defined as balanced , if the chromosome set has the normal complement of genetic information, or unbalanced , if there is additional or missing information.
Some rearrangements are stable, capable of passing through cell division unaltered, whereas others are unstable. 
To be stable, a rearranged chromosome must have normal structural elements, including a single functional centromere and two telomeres.
Some of the types of structural rearrangements observed in human chromosomes are illustrated in Figure 9-4. 

Figure 9-4

Structural rearrangements of chromosomes, described in the text., A

Terminal and interstitial deletions, each generating an acentric fragment.
B. Unequal crossing over between segments of homologous chromosomes or between sister chromatids (duplicated or deleted segment indicated by the brackets).
C. Ring chromosome with two acentric fragments.
D. Generation of an isochromosome for the long arm of a chromosome.
E. Robertsonian translocation between two acrocentric chromosomes. 
F. Insertion of a segment of one chromosome into a nonhomologous chromosome.

Unbalanced Rearrangements

In unbalanced rearrangements, the phenotype is likely to be abnormal because of deletion, duplication, or (in some cases) both.
Duplication of part of a chromosome is comparable with partial trisomy; deletion leads to a partial monosomy.
Any change that disturbs the normal balance of functional genes can result in abnormal development.

Deletion

Deletion is loss of a chromosome segment, resulting in chromosome imbalance (Fig., 9 - 4A).
A carrier of a chromosomal deletion (with one normal homolog and one deleted homolog) is hemizygous for the genetic information on the corresponding segment of the normal homolog.
The clinical consequences depend on the size of the deleted segment and the number and function of the genes that it contains.

A deletion may be terminal or interstitial.
Deletions may originate simply by chromosome breakage and loss of the acentric segment.
Alternatively, unequal crossing over between misaligned homologous chromosomes or sister chromatids may account for deletion in some cases (Fig., 9-4B).
Deletions can also be generated by abnormal segregation from a balanced translocation or inversion, as described later.

High-resolution banding techniques can reveal deletions that are too small to be seen in ordinary metaphase spreads (Fig., 9 - 5).
To be identifiable cytogenetically by high-resolution banding, a deletion must span at least 2000 to 3000 kb, but karyotypically undetectable deletions with phenotypic consequences have been detected by molecular techniques (Ledbetter and Cavenee, 1989). 

Small deletions within genes, or extending over several contiguous genes, are recognized mechanisms of mutation (Chapter 6).

Figure 9-5

Demonstration of chromosomal deletions in "contiguous gene syndromes" by high-resolution banding 

In each case, the homolog on the right is deleted. 
Top: Deletion of 15qll.2- ql3.2 on one copy of chromosome 15 in Prader-Willi syndrome. (C = centromere.) Bottom: Deletion of the terminal short arm of one copy of chromosome 17 in Miller-Dieker syndrome.
Chromosomes from 2 cells are shown.
In both syndromes, loss of material from one homolog leads to segmental aneusomy, a partial imbalance of genetic material.

Table 9-2

Selected Example of Segmental Aneusomy

Disorder.
Description.


Langer-Giedion syndrome.
Mental retardation, microcephaly, dysmorphism, bone abnormalides.


DiGeorge sequence.
Absence of thymus and parathyroids.


WAGR syndrome.
Wilms tumor with aniridia, gonadoblastoma, and retardahon; see Chapter 16.


Retinoblastoma .
Embryonic neoplasm of retinal cells, childhood cancer; see Chapter 16.


Prader-Willi syndrome.
Dysmorphic syndrome; see Chapter 4.


Angelman syndrome.
Dysmorphic syndrome; see Chapter4.


Miller-Dieker syndrome.
Severe dysmorphic syndrome with lissencephaly and other malformations.


Numerous deletions have been identified in the investigation of dysmorphic patients and in prenatal diagnosis, but knowledge of the functional genes lost in the deleted segments and their relation to the phenotypic consequences is extremely limited at present.
Several dysmorphic syndromes are associated with cytogenetically visible deletions (Table 9 - 2).
The example of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes (described in Chapter 4) suggests that genomic imprinting, a process that marks maternal and paternal chromosomes differently, may lead to differences in phenotypic expression in patients with deletions that appear to be identical in extent but different in parental origin.

Duplications

Duplications, like deletions, can originate by unequal crossing over (Fig. 9-4B) or by abnormal segregation from meiosis in a carrier of a translocation or inversion.
In general, duplication appears to be much less harmful than deletion.
However, because duplication in a gamete results in chromosomal imbalance, and because the chromosome breaks that generate it may disrupt genes, duplication often leads to some phenotypic abnormality.

Although many duplications have been reported, very few of any one kind have been studied so far, and generalizations about the associated phenotypes would be premature.
Nonetheless, certain phenotypes appear to be associated with duplications of particular chromosomal regions.

Ring Chromosomes

Ring chromosomes are formed when a chromosome undergoes two breaks and the broken ends of the chromosome reunite in a ring structure (Fig., 9-4C).
If the centromere is within the ring, the two distal fragments, lacking a centromere, are lost.
Ring chromosomes are quite rare but have been detected for every human chromosome.

Rings may undergo difficulties at mitosis, when the two sister chromatids of the ring chromosome attempt to disjoin at anaphase.
There may be breakage of the ring followed by fusion, and larger and smaller rings may thus be generated.
Because of this mitotic instability, it is not uncommon for ring chromosomes to be found in only a proportion of cells.

THE SEX CHROMOSOMES AND THEIR ABNORMALITIES 

The X and Y chromosomes have long attracted attention and interest because they differ between the sexes, because they have their own specific patterns of inheritance, and because they are involved in primary sex determination.
They are structurally quite distinct and are subject to different forms of genetic regulation, yet they pair in male meiosis.
For all these reasons, they require special attention.
In the previous chapter, we considered the general principles of clinical cytogenetics, as well as specific features of the major autosomal aneuploidy conditions.
In this chapter, we review the common sex chromosome abnormalities and their clinical consequences, the current state of knowledge concerning the control of sex determination, and other Mendelian abnormalities of sexual differentiation.

THE CHROMOSOMAL BASIS FOR SEX DETERMINATION 

It has been known for decades that human male and female cells have different sex chromosomes (Painter, 1921) and that the difference is visible in interphase as well as in mitosis (Barr and Bertram, 1949).
Although Painter's discovery of the human sex chromosomes could not be exploited clinically at the time because cytogenetic techniques were inadequate, the discovery of sex chromatin masses ( Barr bodies ) in interphase cells of females but not of males was soon followed by the development of a simple technique that allowed Barr bodies to be studied in buccal smears (Fig., 10-1).
As a result, it was quickly recognized that although most females were "chromatin positive" and most males were "chromatin negative," there were exceptions.
It was especially noteworthy that many short, infertile females with a condition known as Turner syndrome had no Barr bodies, whereas tall, infertile males with a condition known as Klinefelter syndrome did have Barr bodies. 

Soon after cytogenetic analysis became feasible, the chromosomal basis for these discrepancies became apparent.
Because the anomalous sex chromatin findings had suggested that the Turner and Klinefelter syndromes were characterized by unusual sex chromosome constitutions, they were two of the first conditions for which chromosome studies were performed.
Patients with Klinefelter syndrome were found to have 47 chromosomes with two X chromosomes as well as a Y chromosome (karyotype xxx ; Jacobs and Strong, 1959), whereas most Turner syndrome patients were found to have only 45 chromosomes with a cinolP x chromosome (karyotype 45,X; Ford et al., 1959).
These findings promptly established the crucial role of the Y chromosome in normal male development. 

Figure 10-1

Sex chromatin (Barr bodies) in epithelial cells of human buccal Mucosa

Arrows indicate the sex chromatin close to the nuclear membrane in female cells.

A male cell (right) has no sex chromatin. (From Moore KL, Barr ML [1955] Smears from the oral mucosa in the determination of chromosomal sex.
Lancet 2:57-58).

The next step in the understanding of the human sex chromosomes was an explanation of sex chromatin in terms of X inactivation .
As additional sex chromosome abnormalities were identified, the number of Barr bodies seen in interphase cells was observed to be always one less than the total number of X chromosomes per cell:

Table

Sexual phenotype.
Karyotype.
Barr bodies.


Male.
xxx .
O.


xxx .
1.


xxx .
2.


xxx .
3.


Female.
xxx .
O.


xxx .
1.


xxx .
2.


xxx .
3.


xxx .
4.


The theory of X inactivation (the Lyon hypothesis ) is that in somatic cells in normal females (but not in normal males), one X chromosome is inactivated, thus equalizing the expression of X-linked genes in the two sexes.

The Barr body represents the late-replicating, inactive X chromosome (see Chapter 4).
The replication asynchrony between active (early-replicating) and inactive (late replicating) X chromosomes can be recognized cytogenetically by specialized banding procedures called "replication banding" (Fig., 10-2). 
In patients with extra X chromosomes, any X chromosome in excess of one is inactivated and forms a Barr body (see table above).
Thus all diploid somatic cells in beth males and females have a single active X chromosome, regardless of the total number of Xs or Ys present.
X inactivation and its consequences have been discussed in relation to X-linked disorders in Chapter 4.

Even though many abnormalities of the sex chromosomes have been defined and their clinical consequences reported in detail, there still remain mysteries about the precise role of the sex chromosomes in sexual differentiation.
There are exceptions, not yet fully understood, to the rule that females are always XX and males always XY.

These exceptions, which include XX males, XY females, and XX true hermaphrodites, suggest that the entire Y chromosome is not the sole determinant of phenotypic sex.
Molecular analysis is currently being used to find an explanation for these unusual karyotype/phenotype combinations and to identify the gene or genes on the Y chromosome that are responsible for determining sex.
Discrepancies between chromosomal sex and gonadal or phenotypic sex can also be caused by single-gene mutations, some X-linked and others autosomal.

EMBRYOLOGY OF THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 

The embryology of the male and female reproductive systems is summarized in Figure 10-3.
By the sixth week of development in both sexes, the primordial germ cells have migrated from their earlier extraembryonic location to the gonadal ridges, where they are surrounded by the sex cords to form a pair of primitive gonads.
Up to this time, the developing gonad, whether chromosomally XX or XY, is bipotential.

The current concept is that development into an ovary or a testis is determined by the coordinated action of a sequence of genes that leads to ovarian development when no Y chromosome is present or to testicular development if a Y is present.
The ovarian pathway is followed unless a gene on the short arm of the Y, designated TDF (testis-determining factor), acts as a switch, diverting development into the male pathway.
The search for the major testis-determining gene is one of the leading current problems in medical genetics, and we return to it later.

Figure 10-2

Replication banding and late replication of the inactive X chromosome in peripheral lymphocytes from a normal 46,XX female (left) and a 47, XXX female (right) 

Brightly staining chromosomal regions are those that replicate late in the S phase.
Active X chromosomes (small arrow) replicate synchronously with the rest of the karyotype. 
Inactive X chromosomes (long arrows) replicate late. (Figure on right from Latt SA et al. [1976] BrdU-33258 Hoechst analysis of DNA replication in human lymphocytes with supernumerary or structurally abnormal X chromosomes.
Chromosoma 57:135-153.) In the presence of a Y chromosome, the medullary tissue forms typical testes with seminiferous tubules and Leydig cells, which, under the stimulation of human chorionic gonadotropin from the placenta, become capable of androgen secretion.
The spermatogonia, derived from the primordial germ cells by 200 or more successive mitoses, form the walls of the seminiferous tubules together with supporting Sertoli cells.

If no Y chromosome is present, the gonad, by default, forms an ovary; the cortex develops, the medulla regresses, and oogonia begin to develop within follicles.
The oogonia are derived from the primitive germ cells by a series of about 30 mitoses, far fewer than the number required for spermatogenesis.
Beginning at about the end of the third month, the oogonia enter meiosis I, but this process is arrested at a stage called dictyotene , in which the cell remains until ovulation occurs many years later (see Chapter 2).
Many of the oogonia degenerate before birth, and only about 400 mature into ova during the 30 years or so of sexual maturity of the female.

Figure 10-3

Schematic of the gonads and genital ducts, described in the text

While the primordial germ cells are migrating to the genital ridges, thickenings in the ridges indicate the developing genital ducts, the mesonephric (formerly called Wolffian) and paramesonephric (formerly called Mllerian) ducts.
In the male, the Leydig cells of the fetal testes produce androgen, which stimulates the mesonephric ducts to form the male genital ducts, and the Sertoli cells produce a hormone that suppresses formation of the paramesonephric ducts.
In the female (or in an embryo with no gonads), the mesonephric ducts regress, and the paramesonephric ducts develop into the female duct system.

In the early embryo, the external genitalia consist of a genital tubercle, paired labioscrotal swellings, and paired urethral folds.
From this undifferentiated state, male external genitalia develop under the influence of androgens, or, in the absence of a testis, female external genitalia are formed regardless of whether an ovary is present.

THE Y CHROMOSOME

The structure of the Y chromosome and its role in sexual development have been analyzed at the molecular level (Fig., 10 -4).
In male meiosis, the X and Y chromosomes normally pair by segments at the ends of their short arms and undergo recombination in that region (see Fig., 2-14).
The pairing segment includes the pseudeautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes, so called because the X-and Y-linked copies of this region are homologous to one another, like pairs of autosomes.

Figure 10-4

Schematic of the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome

Chromosomal rearrangements in XX males and in a female with a t(Y;22) have been key to the assignment of the sex-determining region to a location near the pseudoautosomal boundary.
Point mutations (*) in the SRY gene in 46,XY females provide direct evidence that this gene may be the same as TDF.

(Based on data of Page et al., 1987; Sinclair et al., 1990; Berta et al., 1990;Jager et al., 1990.)

The Major Testis-Determining

Gene

As a result of recombination in meiosis I, sequences in the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes normally exchange (Fig.,10 -5).
In rare instances, however, genetic recombination occurs between the X and Y short arms outside of the pseudoautosomal region, and this aberrant exchange mechanism can produce two rare abnormalities: XX males and XY females .
XX males are phenotypic males with a 46,XX karyotype who usually possess some Y chromosomal sequences translocated to the short arm of the X.
These sequence s are not visible cytogenetically but have been revealed by molecular analysis (Fig.,10-5; Ferguson-Smith, 1966; Petit et al., 1987). 

Similarly, phenotypic females with a 46,XY karyotype have lost the Testis-determining region of the Y chromosome.
Each of these sex-reversal disorders occurs with a frequency of approximately 1 in 20,000 births.

Figure 10-5

Etiology of XX male phenotype by aberrant exchange between X- and Y-linked sequences

X and Y chromosomes normally recombine within the pseudoautosomal segment in male meiosis.
If recombination occurs below the pseudoautosomal boundary, between the X-specific and Y-specific portions of the chromosomes, sequences responsible for male sexual differentiation may be translocated from the Y to the X. Fertilization by a sperm containing such an X chromosome leads to an XX male.

Different deletions of the pseudoautosomal region and of the sex-specific region of the Y chromosome have been used in an effort to map the precise location of the primary testis-determining region on the short arm of the Y chromosome.

Examining an XX male with the smallest identified segment of Y chromosomal material and a female w ho carried a Y;22 translocation but lacked a small region of Yp, Page and colleagues (1987) identified a region approximately 140 kb long (equivalent to only 0.2 percent of the entire Y chromosome) that was believed likely to encode at least part of the TDF gene (Fig., 10-4).
DNA sequences contained in this region are highly conserved in other mammals, and a homologous segment was identified on the X chromosome. 
The Y-linked sequence was called ZFY because it potentially encodes a so-called "zinc-finger" protein that, by analogy to other zinc-finger proteins, is thought to bind to nucleic acids in a sequence-specific manner and thus potentially to regulate gene expression.

Initially, the ZFY sequence was accepted as a strong candidate for the long-sought major testis-determining gene, TDF, but more recent studies have cast serious doubt on this interpretation. 
The presence of an X-linked homologous gene (known as ZFX), the absence of ZFY-like sequences on the sex chromosomes of marsupials, reports of XX males with Y chromosome sequences closer to the pseudoautosomal boundary but without ZFY sequences (Palmer et al., 1989), and failure of expression of the mouse homolog of ZFY in the embryonic testes of mice (Koopman et al., 1989) all argue that ZFY and TDF are distinct and that ZFY cannot by itself induce male sexual differentiation (Burgoyne, 1989). 
Another strong candidate locus, termed the "sex-determining region on the Y" (SRY), was identified by Goodfellow and colleagues (Sinclair et al., 1990).
This gene lies between the pseudoautosomal boundary and ZFY on the short arm of the Y chromosome and is present in several XX males or XX hermaphrodites (described later in this chapter) who do not have ZFY sequences (Fig., 10-4). 
Deletion of the SRY gene (as well as the ZFY gene) in the female patient with the Y;22 translocation mentioned earlier leaves open the question of which (or both) of these two genes ma y be responsible for inducing maleness (Page et al., 1990). 
Most recently, however, three female 46,XY patients have been found who have no cytological alterations of the Y chromosome but who have mutations in the SRY coding sequence (Fig., 10-4), thus strongly implicating SRY in male sex determination (Berta et al.,1990; Jager et al., 1990).
Nonetheless, a secondary role for ZFY cannot be ruled out.
Thus the identity and the precise localization of the true testis-determining gene or genes remain to be proved.
In the meantime, the story serves as an excellent illustration of the importance of examining a few or even one unusual patient for establishing genetic principles of extraordinary theoretical and practical significance.
