
Dobris Overview: Introduction 

- Albania
- Andorra
- Austria
- Belarus
- Belgium
- Bosnia-Herzegovina
- Bulgaria
- Croatia
- Cyprus
- Czech Republic
- Denmark
- Estonia
- Finland
- France
- FYROM
- Germany
- Greece
- Hungary
- Iceland
- Ireland
- Italy
- Kazakhstan (partly)
- Latvia
- Liechtenstein
- Lithuania
- Luxembourg
- Malta
- Moldova
- Monaco
- Netherlands
- Norway
- Poland
- Portugal
- Romania
- Russian Federation (partly)
- San Marino
- Serbia-Montenegro
- Slovak Republic
- Slovenia
- Spain
- Sweden
- Switzerland
- Turkey (partly)
- Ukraine
- United Kingdom
- Vatican City

INTRODUCTION 

This publication summarizes a major report on the European environment which has been prepared by the EC Task Force for the European Environment Agency in cooperation with the UNECE, UNEP, OECD, Council of Europe, WHO, IUCN and Eurostat, together with the individual countries of Europe.
Called Europe's Environment: The Dobris Assessment, the report covers the state of the environment in a Europe of nearly 50 States.

The report is aimed at all those concerned with the environment professionally, as well as those with a more general interest.
It is intended to provide an objective basis for planners and developers involved in policy making and programming in environment and sectorial fields.
It should also serve to inform and raise awareness generally about environmental problems facing Europe today.

This overview has been produced to help make the report accessible, introducing some of the main findings and results which have been reached. 

Background to the report 

The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), convened in June 1992, stressed that a new responsibility for environmental protection had to be shared by all countries if sustainable development were to become a reality.
UNCED's action plan, 'Agenda 21', outlines the actions needed to halt and reverse environmental degradation and bring about sustainable development in all countries. 

These concerns have also been the subject of a series of European initiatives.
The Bergen Ministerial Conference (May 1990) on sustainable development in the ECE region emphasized the need to improve reporting on the state of the environment.

Prompted by the changes occurring in Central and Eastern Europe, a joint meeting of environment ministers from this region, the EU and EFTA was held in Dublin in June 1990.
This meeting produced the idea of holding regular European ministerial conferences to address environmental matters.
The first of these 'pan-European' conferences took place in Dobris Castle in the former Czechoslovakia in June 1991.
It was at this conference that the present report on the state of the European environment was called for.
The second conference was held in Lucerne (1993) and the third is scheduled for 1995 in Sofia, with the aim of adopting an Environmental Programme for Europe (EPE) for which this report is a basic input.

Form of the report 

The report is presented in several parts.
Part I introduces the context and the reporting techniques used.
Part II assesses the state of the environment in eight different fields.
Part III examines the pressures which impact the environment and Part IV describes the sources of these pressures - human activities - in eight different sectors.
Part V summarizes twelve major environmental problems in Europe.

The major highlights of the report are concluded in Part VI, summarizing for each theme important findings, responses and policy options, information strengths and gaps.
A statistical compendium to the report is published separately by Eurostat.

THE CONTEXT 

Reporting on Europe's environment 

Explains how the report has been developed and organized and the functions it fulfills.
The coverage, constraints, information selection and assessment methods used are presented and discussed.
The report model (see illustration) shows the analytical structure of the report and specifies the interrelationships between environmental assessment, policy making and implementation.

The analytical model of the report and its relation to policy making and implementation.
At its most simple, human activities put pressure on the environment giving rise to environmental problems.

Environmental changes and human development 

Provides the context for the assessment of Europe's environment where human action is now altering the global environment on an unprecedented scale.

The interactions between environment and development are examined in relation to changes in human induced interferences with biogeochemical cycles.
Demographic and economic growth are key to understanding human-induced pressures on the environment, and sustainability and carrying capacity are important concepts against which to analyse these problems.

Europe often plays a disproportionate role in contributing to environmental change.

In the past 100 years, world population has tripled, the world economy has grown 20 times, fossil fuel consumption has increased by a factor of 30 and industrial expansion by a factor of 50.

Since the 18th century 6 million km 2 Of the world's forest - an area larger than Europe - has been cleared.

World-wide as much sulphur and nitrogen is cycled by human activities as by natural phenomena.

Europe: the continent 

Europe is the second smallest continent, comprising little more than 7% of the Earth's land area.
The continent is surrounded by nine major seas, including the world's two largest land-locked seas, the Caspian and the Black Sea.
The area includes 46 States, of which 19 are in the EU and EFTS area, 21 in Central, Eastern and South-eastern Europe, four small continental States and two are small island territories.
The continent spans three climatic zones: the circumpolar, the temperate and the subtropical.
The chapter discusses these, and the geological and biogeographic factors that give the continent its soil and vegetation patterns.
It concludes with an account of land use in Europe.

The proportion of European land devoted to agriculture varies from less than 10% in Finland, Sweden and Norway, to more than 70% in Hungary, Ireland, Ukraine and the United Kingdom.

Forest cover varies from 6% in Ireland to 66% in Finland.
Each decade 2% of agricultural land is lost to urbanization.
Europe is two to three times more densely populated than the United States and Africa, but only half as much as Asia.

The Assessment 

The environment is assessed following the usual media breakdown; - air, water and soil - as well as in more integrated functional units of assessment: landscapes, nature and wildlife and urban.
A summary of human health in Europe completes the picture.

Air 

Presents an overview of the state and trends of the air in Europe, examining sources, impacts and responses for air pollutants on local, regional and global scales.
Although air quality is improving in some respects (SO2), in others it is deteriorating.
The impacts of air pollution on human health and the environment are major European problems and require regulations and conventions to set limits on emissions.

Short-term air pollution exceeds WHO Air Quality Guidelines at least once a year in most large European cities.
Short-term summer peak levels of ozone affect more than 100 million Europeans.

Critical loads for acidification are exceeded in more than 60% of Europe's area.
Globally, stratospheric ozone depletion and increased concentrations of greenhouse gases are looming problems.

Inland waters 

Reviews the state of groundwater, rivers and lakes, evaluates water quantity and quality trends, and relates both the state and the trends to natural processes and human activities.
Where possible, the results highlight the condition of inland water in each European country and provide comparisons of the magnitude of water issues in different areas of Europe.
The data were obtained from many sources, including national water resource surveys, as a result of EU legislation, state of the environment reports and the scientific literature, and from the results of a specially prepared questionnaire.

Annual mean nitrogen concentration in European rivers 

On average 15% of Europe's renewable water resources is abstracted every year, but there are large regional variations.
Industry withdraws about 53%, agriculture 26% and the domestic sector 19% of the total. 65% of the population is supplied from groundwater; in many areas, groundwater is overexploited and its quality under threat.

Estimated nitrate and pesticide levels in soil water exceed EU drinking water guidelines over much of the continent.
Eutrophication of rivers and lakes is widespread.
Acidification is a severe problem in a large part of Nordic countries.

The seas 

Evaluates the scale of a series of problems common to each of Europe's nine major seas - Mediterranean, Black Sea, Caspian Sea, White Sea, Barents Sea, Norwegian Sea, Baltic Sea, North Sea, North Atlantic Ocean.
The problems are: lack of effective catchment management; coastal zone pollution; eutrophication; conflict of uses in the coastal zones; introduction of non-indigenous species; lack of control of offshore activities; over-exploitation of resources; and sea level rise as a result of global warming.

Protected areas as percentage of total country areas.
All seas, except for sub-arctic ones, face eutrophication problems.
Nitrate has increased two to threefold in some coastal areas of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Insufficient control of offshore activities is creating pollution problems in the Black, North and Caspian seas.

Introduction of non-indigenous species had severe ecological impacts on the Black Sea.
In the Mediterranean, endemic species, including the monk seal, are endangered.
The Caspian Sea level has risen by 1.5 metres since 1977.

Soil 

Highlights the major role of soil in the functioning of ecosystems and the importance of soil protection for the maintenance of a healthy environment.

The functions so performs and how they are affected by human activities reviewed and assessed.
The most severe soil degradation processes are overviewed.
For each threat, the main cause magnitude, impacts and remedies are presented.
Since the little quantitative information on soil degradation, most the assessments are qualitative.
Some important quantitave assessments were calculated from updates of available ms or derived from case studies.

Soil erosion in Europe affects 115 million ha causing loss of fertility and water pollution.
Critical loads for acidification are exceeded in 7; million ha of Europe's forest soils.
Widespread over-application of fertilisers result leaching and runoff and leads to eutrophication.

Landscapes 

Provides an overview of the values and functions that characterize cultural landscapes.
Thirty major European landscape types are differentiated and the geographical locations presented on a map.
Typical landscape stresses are illustrated with case studies.
A portrait of legal and strategic measures for landscape conservation is given.

European landscapes are undergoing changes or disappearing because of agricultural intensification and abandonment, urban expansion and the development of infrastructure and transport.

6% of Europe's land area is under landscape protection, but with generally a weak legal status.

Nature and wildlife 

Brown bear 

Brown bears live in deciduous and coniferous woods in mountain areas and in plain taiga.
In mountain areas they have a seasonal vertical migration up to altitudes of 3000 m.
Despite their reputation as predatory carnivores, bears feed mainly on plants, berries, insects, small vertebrates and eggs.
They are generally active at night and live in relatively small areas with a home range of 500 2500 hectares.
Brown bears used to live in all parts of Europe, from Britain and Spain in the west to the Urals in the east.
Today, they have completely disappeared from most Western and Central European countries.
In the Pyrenees, the Alps and the north of Greece, only very small isolated populations are left.

Brown bears were generally considered a danger to domesticated livestock and were persecuted everywhere.
However, loss of habitat (large and coherent forest areas, free of disturbance) is another main reason for their decline (Council of Europe, 1989).

Analyses consecutively the states of ecosystems, fauna and flora, and nature conservation measures.
The main habitat types are described and the ecological functions of and environmental threats to eight natural (or quasi natural) major ecosystem types are examined.
The geographic distribution, management qualities and prevailing stresses are analysed and illustrated.
Data for this assessment derive from a review performed by an expert network.
The assessment of Europe's fauna and flora deals with seven groups of species.
Special attention is given to threatened species according to Red Data lists.
For both ecosystems and species, a number of case studies portray typical examples and give detailed information to illustrate the overall findings.
Existing as well as potential legal and strategic measures in nature conservation are reviewed on national and international scales.

Forests, that once covered 80-90% of Europe, now account for 33% of land cover.
Bogs, fens and marshes have disappeared in large numbers in Western and Southern Europe - Spain has lost 60%.
Between a third and half of all fish, reptiles, mammals and amphibians in Europe are under threat.

The total area of European protected sites has trebled since 1972, but most are small and fragmented, and lack funds and staff for effective protection.

The urban environment 

Examines the quality of the urban environment in Europe and the impact of cities on the regional and global environment.
Experimental urban environmental indicators are used to identify major problems in selected European cities.
The assessment focuses on urban environmental quality, flows and patterns.
The chapter stresses the need for an integrated approach to urban areas and examines planning and management strategies for improving the urban environment.

Two-thirds of Europeans live in urban areas covering I per cent of the total land area.
Urban air quality has improved but is still frequently unsatisfactory in large cities.
A city of I million inhabitants consumes daily an average of 11 500 tonnes of fossil fuels, 320 000 tonnes of water and 2 000 tonnes of food, and produces 25 000 tonnes of CO2, 1 600 tonnes of solid waste and 300 000 tonnes of wastewater.
Urban water supply is neither allocated nor managed efficiently.

Population growth in selected European cities 

Human health 

Summarizes the main issues related to the health status of Europeans and the links between health and the environment.
The review is based on the results of a contemporaneous assessment of environment and health performed by WHO Concern for Europe's Tomorrow.
The simplest indicator of health is the self-assessment, which show that of 14 European countries the residents of Norway and Sweden are most satisfied with their health.
Other indicators of health are examined, including life expectancy and infant mortality, and the major causes of death in Europe - circulatory diseases, cancers, respiratory diseases, communicable diseases, and injury and poisoning - are reviewed.
It concludes with a review of the major environment-related health problems in Europe.

Proportional distribution of main causes of death, 1987-91, by countries (countries ordered by life expectancy).
Of all air pollutants, suspended particulate matter poses the greatest problem to health, provoking asthma an obstructive airway disease.

Bathing water contamination results in more than 2 million cases of gastro-intestinal diseases annually in Europe.
Life expectancy at birth is several years lower, and the infant mortality rate higher, in Central and Eastern Europe than in the rest of the continent.

PRESSURES 

This section examines the agents and means by which Europe's environment is altered by focusing on the pressures induced human activities.

Population, production and consumption 

Examines the complex and still poorly understood relationship between people, resources and development attempt to clarify the issues involved.
The chapter concludes by stressing the importance of assessing the environment implications of long-term economic and development programmes.

12.8% of the world population are Europeans, a proportion which is decreasing because of lowered fertility in most European countries.
Adjusted living standards vary by a factor of more than four between Eastern and Western Europe.
Most Central and Eastern European countries rely food imports - Western European countries import much animal feed.

- Coal
- Oil
- Gas
- Nuclear
- Hydro
- Others
- World
- Western Europe
- Eastern Europe
- Former USSR

World and European primary energy consumption 1970-90 (tonnes of oil equivalent, %).

Exploitation of natural resources 

Explores the differences between renewable (water, forests and crops) and non-renewable (fossil fuels and metal ores) resources.
International trade and the growing interdependence of nations have made the sustainable management of these resources a global issue.
The chapter focuses on major developments in the use of resources in Europe and reviews the statistics used to monitor resource use.

Europe has 8% of worldwide renewable fresh-water resources but accounts for 15% of withdrawals.

Although Europe (excluding the former USSR) had 1.9 million hectares more forest and wooded land in 1990 than in 1981, atmospheric pollution and uncontrolled logging (Russian Federation) are causing forest loss and damage.

Europe has depleted most of its high-grade mineral reserves and now relies mostly on imports, mainly from Africa.

Emissions 

Presents an overview of emissions to air and water in Europe: their physico-chemical characteristics, magnitude, pathways and sinks.
The overview of atmospheric emissions of major pollutants in European countries is based on data reported to UNECE al where available, on Corinair 1990.
The analysis of emissions to water is based on the limited quantitative information available and focuses on emissions from agriculture and wastewater.
The examples illustrate the contribution of industry as a source of emissions to the aquatic environment.
Existing emission inventories in European countries are examined; they highlight the need for an integrated means of collecting data on emission and waste to all media, and the need to harmonize emission inventory methodologies at the European level.

Europe accounts for between 20 and 30% of global human-induced emissions of CO2, SO2, VOCs and nitrogen oxides in densely populated areas about half of the phosphorus discharged to surface water is related to sewage discharges.

Sulphur dioxide emission trends.

Waste 

Analyses present trends in waste production in Europe, and assesses the potential threats to human health and the environment resulting from current waste management practices.
Current patterns of transfrontier movements of hazardous waste across European countries are examined.
The options to reduce waste and recycle materials through integrated; processes are presented for a number of waste streams.
The assessment is based on up-to-date information from a joint OECD/Eurostat survey and state of the environment report The limited availability, quality and comparability of existing waste statistics highlight the importance of harmonizing was classification systems at the European level.

Composition of municipal waste, 1990 

On average, Europeans produce 350 kg of municipal waste per capita per year an increasing amount of industrial waste is considered hazardous.
High production rates offset efforts towards waste minimization and recycling.

European waste dumps cover between 1 200 and 1 700 km 2, while there are 2 000 km 2 of derelict industrial land.

Noise and radiation 

Reviews the main impacts of the important 'physical fields' in Europe - environmental noise, ionizing and non-ionizing radiation - and relates them to main sources.
Noise data from international sources (OECD and WHO) are presented and analysed wherever possible, to give the overall situation in Europe and in individual countries.
Non-ionizing radiation deals with electromagnetic fields and ultraviolet radiation.
The main sources and effects of ionizing radiation - natural and artificial - in Europe are described.

In the highly industrialized countries of Europe more than 50% of the population is exposed to noise levels from traffic which exceed the level at which people become seriously annoyed during the daytime about 113 million Europeans -17% of the population - are exposed to levels of noise that have serious negative impacts overexposure to ultraviolet radiation is so far due mostly to lifestyle; there are indications of a 5% increase in W-B radiation in winter in the northern hemisphere.

Radon exposure is estimated to cause 10 000 cancer deaths a year in Europe.

Chemicals and genetically modified organisms 

The manufacture, marketing and use of chemicals result in the release of many compounds to the environment, often with undesirable effects on human health, welfare and ecosystems.
The sources of these compounds are described, as are the impacts of selected chemicals of concern.

The use of genetically modified organisms in EU countries is also examined, with their potential undesirable effects and the procedures in place to control their safe use.

Field releases of GMOs notified in the EU in 1991-94.About 100 000 chemicals are marketed in the EU, and between 200 and 300 new ones appear each year between 1991 and 1994, nearly 300 notifications of field releases of genetically modified organisms were made in the EU.

Natural and technological hazards 

Examines the characteristics and importance of accidents and natural hazards as causes of environmental impacts.
Their causes and consequences in Europe are summarized, and the different types of damage that can be produced are identified.
Examples are given of industrial accidents (Flixborough and Seveso, for example), transport accidents, marine accidents and nuclear accidents (as at Chernobyl).
Natural hazards such as storms and floods, heatwaves, fires and droughts also impact the environment and are potentially exacerbated by human activities.

Caesium contamination around Tschernobyl after the accident 

From a major industrial accidents reporting system, appears that the most accidents occurred in the petroleum industry, and that highly flammable gases and chlorine were the substances most often involve tanker accidents contribute only about 10-15% of a the oil that reaches the sea as a result of human activity.

Precise knowledge of the full consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear accident is unlikely, but some unexpected effects have already emerged.

Natural hazards are having an increased impact on human settlements, probably because of the greater number of settlements and their increased vulnerable due to their uncontrolled extension into high risk areas.

HUMAN ACTIVITIES 

Human activities are the sources of pressures on the environment.

This section analyses eight key sectors, providing overviews of their environmental impacts. outlooks and driving forces.

Energy 

Analyses energy-related activities at three stages - production of primary energy, conversion to derived energy (electricity and heat) and end-use - on local and pan-European scales.
Environmental impacts from fossil fuels, nuclear power and renewable energy are briefly reviewed.
Factors determining future energy use and projected changes are presented.

Energy consumption and GDP have been decoupled since the crises of the 1970s.

Europe uses 41% for industry, 22% for transport and 37% for the domestic and commercial sectors.

Little improvement has been made recently in energy efficiency in Western Europe.

Energy use is responsible for air pollution, acidification, tropospheric ozone, climate change and many other local impacts on water, soil and land.

Industry 

Presents an overview of the environmental impact of pan-European industry, and highlights differences between various parts of Europe.
The importance of industry as a whole in terms of emissions, waste production and the use of natural resources is examined and an evaluation is made of the 'environmental performance' of certain industrial sectors.
Ways in which business practice has changed in response to environmental challenges are also considered.
There is little industrial data that can be directly related to environmental impact.
Production and energy use data are available from international sources and national and state of the environment reports for specific industries.

Energy consumption per unit output in the chemical industry fell by 30% between 1980 and 1989.

Chemical, pulp and paper, cement, steel and nonferrous metal industries lead to the most severe environmental impacts.

25% of SO2 and 14% of nitrogen oxides were emitted by industry in 1990 (20 countries.

There is a trend towards reduction of all emissions from industrial plants.

Electricity generation by source by country group 1990.

Transport 

Reviews the impacts of transport on the environment and provides an overview of the pan-European transport situation the regional differences.
Trends in transport activities and their implications for the environment are examined, as well some underlying forces.
The future outlook for transport Europe is also assessed.
The main data used are drawn from international sources, especially the European Conference of ministers for Transport (ECMT), Eurostat and UNECE.
Data from the scientific literature are used for illustrating.

Private car ownership doubled in Western Europe between 1970 and 1990.

Transport accounts for 25% of energy-related CO2 emissions, with road transport making up 80% of the total.

The total emission of pollutants will increase in the next few years although emissions per vehicle will be reduced.

Land fragmentation due to the transport infrastructure is increasingly impacting on land use.

Over the past 20 years in the EU alone, more than one million people have died in road traffic accidents.

Agriculture 

Analyses the trends in agricultural structure and practice which have evolved to meet demands and indicates the associated potential impacts of agriculture on the environment.
Although plenty of data are available at national level, especially in the EFTA countries, most are related to production, employment structure, fertilizer and pesticide use, livestock demographics and farm sizes; fewer examine the size and contribution to impacts on the environment of agricultural production and changes in agricultural systems.

Agricultural production and employees in selected European countries.

Agriculture accounts for 42% of Europe's total land area.
Farms tend to increase in size in Western Europe while the importance of agriculture in the economy is declining.

There have been consistent gains in production and labour productivity.

Agriculture leads to water pollution, decline of soil quality, loss of biodiversity and landscape changes, but it is also a victim of environmental degradation.

Forestry 

Examines the situation of Europe's forests and how they are being used.
The chapter summarizes how associated activities and practices can result in impacts on the environment, and identifies the main driving forces influencing these changes The data used include traditional forest inventories as well as qualitative information on specific environmental effects and non-wood production forestry.

Forests cover 33% of Europe's land area, a 10% increase over 30 years, most of it in the south and west while cover has remained stable or declined in many eastern countries.

The introduction of non-indigenous species has altered the composition of forests.

Since 1965, European wood production has increased by 18% and consumption by 28.

Evolution in wooded area in Europe (Excluding the Russian Federation).

Fishing and aquaculture 

Reviews the nature and importance of the impacts of fishing on the environment, and provides an overview of the pan European situation with regard to fishing and aquaculture, with regional differences.
The effectiveness of existing fishing policies are evaluated.
The main data sources are drawn from international organizations (FAO and Eurostat) and examples are taken from state of the environment reports and the scientific literature.

Total international fish catch in the North Sea, 1903 - 1988.
Fish stocks are overexploited in the northeast Atlantic and the Mediterranean.

Fixed and drift nets have an impact on marine animals such as dolphins, monk seals and possibly porpoises and seabirds.

Effluent from aquaculture causes water pollution the introduction of exotic species through aquaculture may compete with or replace native species.

Tourism and recreation 

Presents an overview of the pan-European situation with regard to tourism and recreation and highlights local differences.
The impacts of tourism and recreation are assessed in six key settings: protected areas; rural zones; mountains; coastal areas; cities and heritage sites; and theme and leisure parks.
General trends are presented using data from the World Tourism Organization, but since tourism statistics do not adequately reflect the pressures of tourism and recreation on the environment, a case-by-case approach using national or local data is adopted.

Tourism Is one of the most important social and economic activities in the EU its impacts are exacerbated by the concentration of tourist activity into short holiday seasons and relatively small areas.

The environmental impacts from skiing are considerable, especially in the Alps which receives 100 million tourists per year.

The coastal Mediterranean received 157 million tourists in 1990.
Urban-based tourism is gaining popularity.

Households 

Reviews the environmental impacts of households in terms o resource use and emissions, assesses underlying driving force and evaluates possible control measures.

Data relating households directly to the environment are not available.
Socioeconomic data are available from international organizations such as Eurostat.
Case studies using national data are used to help create a more complete picture.

Consumption by households accounts for 70% of industrial production in Europe.
An increase in the number of households combined with a reduction in their size is leading to increased demand for resources.

Western European households now own on average at least one car each, causing significant environmental disruption.

The volume of waste from households continues to increase, and although 50% of household waste could be recycled, less than 10% is actually collected for recycling.

European households account for approximately 19% of total water supplied for all purposes, and this fraction is increasing.

PROBLEMS 

Environmental problems require an integrated approach for their appraisal, cutting across the media, pressures and human activities.
This section highlights 12 problems of particular European concern, focusing on their causes and the goals and strategies being adopted to tackle them.

Climate change 

Deals with the potential impacts in Europe of the enhanced greenhouse effect caused by a rise in CO2 levels in the atmosphere, which is already 50% more than in pre-industrial times.
The chapter discusses the causes of the problem, the consequences (in terms of changed climatic patterns, sea level rise, effects on hydrology, threats to ecosystems and land degradation), and the international strategies being used to try to limit temperature rises.

The greenshouse effect 

An effective doubling of CO2 concentrations is now expected by about the year 2030, producing an estimated temperature rise of 1.5 to 4.5 C. Best guesses' of the effects in Southern Europe give a temperature rise of 2 C in winter and 2-3 C in summer.
Wetter winters are expected to lead to more flooding.
International strategies do not yet address the proposed sustainable goal of limiting temperature rises to not more than 0.1 C per decade.

Stratospheric ozone depletion 

Analyses the problem of stratospheric ozone depletion caused by the release of the chemicals known as chloro- and bromofluorocarbons, used as refrigerants, industrial cleaners, foaming agents and fire extinguishers.
Consequences include possible changes in atmospheric circulation and increased UV-B radiation on the Earth's surface which may lead to increased levels of skin cancer, eye cataracts and effects on ecosystems and materials.
The measures necessary to minimize ozone depletion are discussed.

Changes in average ozone concentrations in Europe (WMO).

Calculated atmospheric clorine concentrations between 1950 and 1990 (RIVM).

Ozone concentrations have declined at mid-latitudes over Europe by 6-7% during the past decade.

Europe contributes about one-third of global annual emissions of ozone-depleting substances.

Skin cancer deaths due to increased UV-B radiation are expected to reach two per million inhabitants by the year 2030.

Even if the London Protocol to the Vienna Convention is fully implemented, it will be at least 70 years before ozone depletion stops.

The loss of biodiversity 

Reviews the extent of biological diversity in Europe, and the reasons for its decline on a continent where human influence are particularly pervasive.
The chapter outlines a series of goals that should lead to the conservation of biodiversity an the sustainable use of biological resources, and strategies fm achieving these goals, including implementation of the Convention on Biodiversity.

European ecosystems include more than 2 500 habitat types and some 215 000 species, of which 90% are invertebrates.

Almost every Europeans country has endemic species (that are found nowhere else).European centres of biodiversity include the Mediterranean Basin and the Caucasus Mountains on the southeastern margin of Europe.
Since the ecological roles of many species are largely unknown, the wisest course is to adopt the precautionary principle of avoiding any actions that needlessly reduce biodiversity.

Representative site of natural European ecosystem groups: aggregated total area, and area where management problems and stress. pose potential threat to biodiversity.

Major accidents 

Reviews the environmental problems caused by accidents an the attention that has been given to trying to set acceptable risk levels, for both human health and the environment.
Risk management is analysed, focusing on the magnitude of the probability that it will occur.
The consequences of an accident and the need for industry to assess its own risks and to u integrated safety management systems and audit tools is discussed.
Emergency response or contingency plans are discussed in both national and transboundary situations.
The chapter concludes with a special section on the causes o nuclear accidents, and strategies for avoiding them.

The availability of accident statistics is a key factor improving the capability to reduce risks through safety management.
Goal setting requires identifying acceptable risk levels: in the Netherlands, for example, processes that have a probability of causing ten deaths more frequently than once every 100 000 years are considered unacceptable.

The specific problems of nuclear safety in Central and Eastern Europe are being tackled by a strategy of assistance by 24 countries.

Acidification 

Combustion of fossil fuels emits sulphur and nitrogen dioxides into the atmosphere where the gases are converted into acids which, after deposition, lead to a series of undesired changes in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
The chapter focuses on the adverse chemical and biological effects found in lakes, soils and forests as a result of deposition of acidifying substances in amounts exceeding critical loads.

Possibilities for reducing emissions through international agreements are discussed.

Severe acidification of freshwater is occurring over large areas of southern Scandinavia, causing widespread fish kills.

Coniferous forests are being damaged in the Czech Republic, Germany, Poland and the Slovak Republic probably as a result of acidification and high concentrations of ozone and sulphur dioxide in the air.

Acid deposition is expected to decrease in Europe following emission reductions but in more than half the area, critical loads will still be exceeded.

Relative comparison of source categories to potential acid deposition, 1990 (RIVM).

Tropospheric ozone and other photochemical oxidants

Reviews the complex reactions that occur in the lower atmosphere producing oxidants such as ozone from the main precursors - nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, methane and carbon monoxide.
Levels of these oxidants are increasing, and are having adverse effects on human health.
They can also affect materials such as paint and plastics, crop and possibly forests.
In the northern hemisphere ozone concentrations are expected to keep rising at 1% a year.
No limiting goals have yet been set and the actions already undertaken are not thought to be sufficient in Europe.

Air Quality Guidelines for ozone are frequently exceeded in most parts of Europe.

There is no chemical in the atmosphere where the difference between actual and toxic levels is as marginal as that for ozone.

At ground level, photochemical oxidants including ozone, can cause premature ageing of the lungs, eye, nose and throat irritation, chest discomfort, coughs and headaches.

The management of freshwater resources 

Water pollution and deterioration of aquatic habitats are severely hampering the use of water for human consumption and wildlife, much water is lost in the distribution system and although 25-30% losses are estimated for France, the United Kingdom and Spain, the figure may reach 50 regarding water as an economic good could benefit water management through appropriate pricing.

European water demand, 1950 - 2000.

The regional distribution of problems concerning European water resource - such as the imbalance of water availability and demand, the destruction of aquatic habitats, and water pollution - is highlighted and discussed in relation to the pressures arising from human activities in the catchment areas.
A series of sustainable goals for water resource management has been proposed, along with the means of reaching them.
Particular attention is devoted to the necessity of international cooperation for management of transboundary rivers.

Forest degradation 

This chapter focuses on the two most important causes of forest degradation across Europe: air pollution, which seriously threatens the sustainability of forest resources in Central, Eastern and, to a lesser extent, Northern Europe; al fire, a major concern in Southern Europe.
The analysis of the, damage is derived from large-scale spatial observations of European-wide surveys.
However, they do not readily permit cause-effect relationships to be identified.
Detailed monitoring could improve understanding.
For fires, causes are often related to socioeconomic factors which render the control o the causes complex since they often indicate conflicts and tensions in the overall system of land management.

A 1992 survey of 113 tree species in 34 European countries showed that 24% of trees were damaged in that defoliation exceeded 25%; 10% of trees were suffering from discoloration.

As much as 54% of the forests of the Czech Republic may have suffered irreversible damage.

An average of 700 000 ha of wooded land are burnt each year by a total of 60 000 fires in Europe.

Average annual number of forest fires 1989-91 (Ministerial Conference of Helsinki.

Coastal zone threats and management 

Highlights the importance of coastal zones as a buffer between the land and the sea, and examines how human activities creating physical modifications of the coastline and emissions of contaminants have led to the deterioration of habitats and water quality.
In order to alleviate the serious environmental problems found in many coastal areas, a strategy for integrated coastal zone management has been proposed.
This strategy takes into account the importance of coasts for human well-being and, at the same time, provides the habitats that plants and animals require.

The European coastline, which is at least 148 000 km long, has an estimated 200 million people living within 50 km of it.
Marine pollution of the coastal zone is a serious problem in all of Europe's seas.
No comprehensive coastal zone management scheme yet exists for Europe.

Coastal evolution in the EU(1991).

Waste production and management 

Analyses the increasingly severe problem of waste disposal and processing caused by steady increases in both the quantity of wastes and in their toxic component.
Despite increased emphasis on waste prevention and recycling, most European waste is disposed of by landfill and incineration.
Waste control options are discussed, pointing out that in spite of progress achieved most waste still escapes control or avoids strict regulations by transfrontier movement across European countries or to developing ones.
Strategies to minimize waste generation and ensure safe management are seen as crucial to move towards sustainable patterns of production and consumption.

Waste disposal costs (in $/tonne).

Europe produces more than 250 million tonnes of municipal waste and more than 850 million tonnes of industrial waste annually.

In the OECD countries of Europe there are 10 000 annual transfrontier movements, totalling 2 million tonnes, of hazardous waste.

More than 55 000 contaminated sites have been registered in just six European countries, and the total contaminated area in Europe is estimated to be between 47 000 and 95 000 km 2 including 1000-3000 km 2 of contamination from landfill.

Urban stress 

Urban areas in Europe show increasing signs of environmental stress, notably in the form of poor air quality, excessive noise and traffic congestion.
On the other hand cities absorb increasing amounts of resources and produce increasing amounts of emissions and waste.
This chapter analyses the causes of urban stress and their link to the rapid changes in urban lifestyles and patterns of urban development which have occurred in the last few decades.
A series of goals and means to achieve sustainable urban patterns in Europe are discussed including: improved urban planning; integrated transport management; efficient use of water, energy and materials; the setting of new standards and improvement of information.

Urban traffic is an increasingly important source of air pollution causing most of the summer smog in European cities and the exceeding WHO Air Quality Guidelines for ozone, nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide.

Urban transport accounts for about 30% of total energy use in most cities and a shift has occurred towards the use of the car which fulfils more than 80% of total mechanized transport.

A Charter of European Cities and Towns Towards Sustainability was signed by 80 local authorities in May 1994 at Aalborg, Denmark.

Chemical risk 

Few environmental problems in Europe cannot be traced back to some form of excessive chemical loading, and this chapter reviews the problems this causes and the ways of reducing the danger.
The goal is to reduce levels of chemicals in the environment to a target, low-risk level where only negligible harmful effects occur to both the population and the environment.

The EU has adopted a far-reaching programme designed to reduce risks from chemicals in the environment.

More than 10 million chemical compounds have been identified, of which about 100 000 are produced commercially.

During June 1993 to June 1994 an EU programme completed the assessment of 1 700 chemicals produced or imported in amounts of more than 1000 tonnes a year.

Progressive achievement of reduced chemical risk to the environment (Dutch Ministry of Housing, Physical Planning and Environment).

Progressive achievement of reduced chemical risk to the environment (Dutch Ministry of Housing, Physical Planning and Environment).
