
Advances in Cancer Detection

Tests to look for the presence of a tumor before any symptoms appear may save more lives than new drug therapies do.

A woman walks into a doctor's office after having felt a lump in her breast.
The doctor feels the mass and an all too familiar story ensues.
A biopsy confirms a diagnosis of breast cancer.
Surgery and perhaps radiation or chemotherapy are prescribed.
This scenario frequently results in a poor outcome simply because the tumor is found only after symptoms appear.

Many people have come to know the early symptoms of cancer through the American Cancer Society's self-screening guidelines. 
But by the time symptoms occur-usually pain or bleeding from an organ or a noticeable mass or lump-many tumors have already grown quite large.
Despite aggressive surgery to remove the tumor, many advanced cancers recur or have metastasized and may end a patient's life.
Tumors that are small, in contrast, are less apt to have spread and more likely to be eradicated. 

A recent revolution in molecular biology and our understanding of cancer genetics has contributed to the development of a series of promising tests both for assessing one's risk of getting cancer and for discovering tumors while they are small enough for surgery to be effective.
Still other assays may determine the best form of chemotherapy for a given patient or the likelihood that a cancer will recur after surgery.

Instead of using invasive probes, the tests can be conducted with a small sample of urine or a pinprick of blood.
Despite the long-standing emphasis on new treatments for cancer, such as gene therapy, many of us believe that early detection and improved monitoring will save the most lives in the years to come, by making it possible for existing therapies to be applied at a time when they can be most effective.

A Genetic Legacy

As is true of many other diseases, the tendency to contract a particular cancer can be inherited.
Mutations in specific genes passed from parent to child determine susceptibility to a number of breast and colon cancers, melanomas and other, rarer tumor types.
Simple blood tests are now under development to hunt for DNA mutations in the two known breast cancer susceptibility genes ( BRCA1 and BRCA2 ).
The tests will help assess risk for early-onset breast cancer. 
If a woman carries this mutation she faces a high likelihood, though not a certainty, of developing breast cancer, usually before her 40th birthday. (Men are confronted with a degree of increased risk for breast and possibly prostate cancer).

Conversely, if a woman is not a carrier of the mutation, her risk of breast cancer may be no higher than that for the general population (about one in eight women will get the disease during their lifetime).

The new tests will allow physicians to monitor closely members of genetically susceptible families.
Mammography and other conventional surveillance may then detect tumors that are still tiny.
But because only a small proportion of cancers are thought to be inherited-about 10 percent of all cases- these tests may be of value only in high-risk families.
Besides breast cancer, other genetic tests for cancer susceptibility will become available-for colon cancer, for example.

The ability to determine a person's risk for cancer decades in advance of the possible onset of the disease itself raises an array of social and even psychological issues.
Legislators have already begun to pass laws to prevent discrimination by insurers against carriers of gene mutations.

Knowledge of one's genetic legacy can also become a terrible psychological burden that must be borne by entire families.
Even members of a family who are not carriers of the mutation must cope with associated guilt feelings.

In addition to the social problems, a number of technical hurdles must be overcome before testing becomes widely practiced. 
Despite significant advances in genetic techniques, the ability to devise reliable tests that will detect cancer-related mutations remains a challenge.
Cases will be missed if a test does not find all mutations that may lead to malignancies. 
Besides being accurate, any test must help improve survival rates-a goal that has yet to be decisively demonstrated.
Some critics of susceptibility tests assert that intensive monitoring following a positive test-a routine schedule of mammograms, for example-may fail to turn up tumors early enough to improve a patient's chances of recovery.

Still, evidence from studies of families that carry a high risk of contracting cancer of the colon suggests that close surveillance, medication with chemical agents that prevent cancer and, in some cases, removal of the colon can dramatically reduce mortality. 

The preemptive option of excising an organ such as the colon or breast may not be fully preventive.
For example, after a mastectomy, some cancerous breast tissue may be left behind, although the risk that a tumor may still arise is diminished. 
The inherent shortfalls of testing for susceptibility highlight the need to develop better strategies for early detection-the discovery of tumors when they are quite small or just beginning to become malignant.
Improved detection should help not only families with inherited susceptibility but also the population at large.

Whether genetic changes are inherited, as in family cancer syndromes, or entirely acquired in the course of a life-time, cancer ultimately results from alterations to DNA , our genetic code.
To become aggressively malignant-proliferating uncontrollably, infiltrating other tissues and metastasizing-cells must sustain damage to a number of cancer-related genes.
From our broadening understanding of the disease, we now know that small clusters of precancerous cells (still considered benign but on their way to developing into cancer) and early cancers frequently harbor detectable genetic changes-a finding that opens new approaches to testing.

Figure 1

CANCER SUSCEPTIBILITY can sometimes be tracked by testing for genetic mutations 

Scientists at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine are searching through the genes of the Lueder family of Omaha, Neb., for a mutation linked to a colon cancer syndrome, which is also implicated in cancers of the urinary tract.
The genes involved reside in sections of three chromosomes ( gray in diagram ).

Molecular Probes

Existing cytological analyses-examination under a microscope of cells from a Pap smear, for instance-are often insufficient for identifying a small number of abnormal cells by size and shape alone.
DNA analysis, however, can detect tiny groups of mutated cells that are shed from a newly cancerous organ into bodily fluids-ranging from urine to sputum or even fluids excreted from the nipples.
A technique called polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) permits more than a million copies to be made from a single strand of DNA present in a precancerous or cancerous cell.
This molecular reproduction biotechnology allows testing to be conducted on clinical samples as small as a single drop of fluid.

The DNA copied through PCR can then be hybridized:
the two strands of the familiar DNA «ladder» are separated, then exposed to genetic probes consisting of a single strand of DNA that contains a specific mutation commonly found in a cancer cell.
Any DNA in a sample of fluid that has the same mutation binds to the probe, which can be tagged with a fluorescent dye or radio-active material.

Much of the work on DNA analysis for cancer detection has been carried out at my laboratory at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
Using these molecular-based methods, my colleagues and I have found telltale cancer gene mutations-in the sputum for lung cancer, in the urine for bladder cancer and in the stool for colon cancer.
Several years ago our team demonstrated that mutations could be detected in a cancer gene called ras by looking in the stool of patients with polyps growths in the colon that are precursors of colon cancer.
The mutations also appeared in patients in whom colon cancer had already developed. 

These results have led to larger trials to determine if identification of ras gene mutations in the stool may become a general screening strategy.
Such a test may find polyps before they show up through colonoscopy (inspection of the colon with a colonoscope).
The simple removal of a polyp greatly diminishes a patient's chances of acquiring cancer.

A test for ras mutations may become routine in medical laboratories within a few years.
But using this type of genetic assay may prove too time-consuming and costly when searching for the multiple mutations that can be found in some genes.
A separate DNA probe must ferret out each mutation.
An alternative approach to spotting malignancies employs small pieces of repetitive DNA called microsatellites.
Because these repeating units contain no useful information for a cell, they are sometimes referred to as junk DNA .
Still, microsatellites hold a wealth of information for the cancer diagnostician and also for forensics specialists who employ them as one of the DNA fingerprinting methods that received much attention during the O., J., Simpson trial.

Spread throughout the DNA in every chromosome, microsatellites have begun to prove their worth in cancer diagnosis. 
The absence of a cluster of these repetitive units indicates deletion of a region of a chromosome.
And a change in size of the microsatellites also confirms a genetic alteration. 

In one small trial, we at Johns Hopkins tested patients who showed symptoms of bladder cancer for the presence of abnormal microsatellites in their urine.
We discovered microsatellite changes by comparing the DNA in the urine to that in blood.
The bladder casts off cancer cells into the urine but leaves blood untainted.
The blood acts as a control sample against which the urine can be tested.
In 19 of 20 of these patients, we found changes in microsatellite DNA pointing to the absence of an entire region of a chromosome.
The same alterations were then documented in biopsies of tumors taken from the patients.
In patients without cancer, we did not find abnormal microsatellites.
Although the test missed one patient, the 95 percent detection rate compares favorably with the record of less sophisticated diagnostic techniques, such as the Pap smears that detect cervical cancer.

The simplicity and low cost of microsatellite testing give it an advantage over detection of specific genetic mutations such as ras .
In fact, the whole technique can be automated:
a technician will need only a drop of urine and blood.
At the press of a button, a machine that performs PCR will make copies of DNA from a urine sample to identify a microsatellite pattern that confirms the presence of bladder cancer.
Larger trials have now begun to validate our preliminary results.
It still remains to be determined whether this approach will work for all cancers.

Other strategies for early detection have focused on monitoring the levels of proteins that are either the product of a mutated gene or are present as a consequence of the unique biochemistry of a particular cancer.
An example is circulating PSA (prostate-specific antigen) in the blood of patients with prostate cancer.
PSA testing has an established role in monitoring the progress of prostate cancer patients: 
high levels of the protein signify a recurrence of a malignancy.
But the test may ultimately prove to be a reliable tool for early detection.
Many doctors have already begun to use it routinely for detecting prostate tumors.

Table 1

Some Family Cancer Syndromes

Syndrome [1] .
Familial melanoma.
Hereditary breast or ovarian cancer.
Hereditary breast cancer.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia.


Cancers.
Melanoma, pancreatic.
Breast, ovarian, others.
Breast, others.
Colon, uterine, others.
Brain, sarcomas, others.
Medullary thyroid, others .


Gene.
MTS1/p16 (tumor suppressor gene).
BRCA1 (tumor suppressor gene).
BRCA2 (tumor suppressor gene).
MSH2, MLH1,PMS1, PMS2 (tumor suppressor genes).
p53 (tumor suppressor gene) .
RET (oncogene).


Enzyme Markers

A simple protein test that has shown promise for both detection and monitoring looks for an enzyme, called telomerase, that is active when cancer arises.
The enzyme affects telomeres-the segments at the ends of chromosomes that grow progressively shorter each time a cell divides.

When telomeres shorten to a certain length, they instruct the cell to self-destruct, providing a mechanism to rid the body of aging cells.
In most normal cells, telomerase is absent, but in cancer, it is active and blocks telomere shortening.
Consequently, the malignant cells do not die.

Because the enzyme is rarely present in normal cells, it can serve as a marker to signal the early presence of cancer cells.
In theory, telomerase screening holds the prospect of providing a general strategy for detection of cancer in bodily fluids and tissue.
Geron, a company based in Menlo Park, Calif., has begun development of a test for telomerase activity based on research carried out by Jerry W., Shay of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and Carol Greider of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

Research on protein tests actually predates the advent of testing for genetic markers.
Many of the tests, however, have failed to live up to expectations because they produce too many false results.
For this reason, recent efforts have tended to shift toward investigations into genetic pathways. 

Besides early detection, clinicians must ascertain how readily a particular tumor will grow or spread.
This assessment-a process called staging-becomes a critical component in determining what additional treatment the patient will receive after surgery-either radiation or chemotherapy.
In staging, doctors examine pieces of tissue to make sure that all the tumor has been removed. 
But tumor cells also may drain into nearby lymph nodes. 
The number of nodes involved after tumor removal is important in establishing the prognosis.

Physicians have long been aware that the standard approach to staging-identifying abnormal cells under the light microscope-often fails to turn up very small populations of cancer cells.
Recently our team at Johns Hopkins has applied molecular technology to detect hidden malignant cells in patients with cancer of the voice box and other head and neck cancers.
Despite aggressive surgery, these tumors often recur in the same area.
In a pilot study, we examined patients whose tumors were known to harbor mutations in a gene known as p53 .
The p53 gene is a tumor suppressor gene that normally inhibits unchecked cell growth; when it becomes inactive, cells often grow cancerous.

We developed molecular probes for p53 that we used to test the lymph nodes and nearby tissue remaining after the tumor's ostensibly complete removal.
In more than half the cases, there was at least one area surrounding the tumor that, though negative under the light microscope, contained cells with the same p53 mutations as the tumor. 
These cancer cells had spread into tissue surrounding the lymph nodes and were left behind after the surgery was done. 

In patients with a positive test, cancer often recurred-and the site of its reappearance was frequently the same area where we had originally detected the presence of malignant cells.
In contrast, those patients who tested negative after surgery have yet to experience another episode of the disease.
Other investigators have also identified these mutations in the lymph nodes of patients with colon cancer.

Such molecular markers as the p53 gene may also help evaluate how patients will respond to various forms of chemotherapy.
The normal function of p53 is to sense genetic damage and then to lead a cell to its own death-the progression of cellular events called apoptosis. 
Many types of chemotherapy work by causing genetic damage to cells, which would usually trigger the p53 gene to initiate apoptosis.
But tumors in which the p53 gene has been deleted or rendered inactive may not respond to certain types of conventional chemotherapy.
In breast cancer, alternative chemotherapies, such as taxol, which may not rely on p53 to bring about apoptosis, are now being considered in patients with p53 mutant tumors.

For genetic detection and monitoring to fulfill its potential, merely sensing the presence of a mutated gene will not be enough. 
It will be necessary to pinpoint the location of a tiny clump of malignant cells so they can be excised.
Improvements in imaging techniques-magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography- will help detect such lesions.

These studies can be augmented by «biological» imaging-the ingestion of low-level radioactive compounds or the use of fluorescent techniques whose radiation signals a tumor's whereabouts.

Despite the benefits of molecular detection, most of the studies mentioned in this article are still quite preliminary and await final validation in large clinical trials.
Still, I remain quite optimistic that within five years, molecular detection-and subsequent strategies for staging and tailoring treatment approaches- will be part of a routine physical examination for most people in the U.S. .

There will probably never be a single test that can detect every kind of tumor.
Each cancer has its own molecular signature and so will require its own test.
Even so, the genetic changes that lead to cancer may also become the disease's ultimate weak point.
We can envision the time when a minuscule sample of blood, tissue or various bodily fluids will reveal the presence of a new or metastatic tumor-be it of the lung, breast, colon or another organ-in time to eradicate it.
The sensitivity of these tests may change our fundamental conception of cancer.
Rather than becoming a frightful diagnosis linked to an inevitable tragedy, early-stage tumors will be caught and cured.

¿Is Genetic Testing Premature? 

The ability to pinpoint inherited genetic mutations that predispose a person to cancer has generated a firestorm of controversy within the medical establishment.
During the 1980s, researchers identified the first marker for cancer susceptibility- a genetic mutation that causes retinoblastoma, a malignancy of the eye. 
But it was the discovery during the mid-1990s of genes involved in breast cancer-and the subsequent development of tests that could assess susceptibility to the disease-that brought the issue to the forefront of public debate.
The importance of finding the breast cancer genes goes beyond that illness alone, given that the genes can predispose both men or women to a variety of other malignancies, from ovarian to, possibly, prostate cancer. 

The dilemma for both ethicists and physicians revolves around the still cloudy meaning of test results.
If a test affirms the presence of a genetic mutation, a woman with a family history of breast cancer faces an 85 percent risk-not a certainty-of contracting the disease.
But the risks are not yet known for a woman with the mutation who does not have any relatives who have had the disease.

Even with test results in hand, a woman will face difficult decisions about what to do with this knowledge.
A negative test for an inherited genetic defect may give her an unwarranted sense of complacency, because about 85 percent of cancers are not inherited, and she remains at risk for acquiring the non-inheritable type.
She may also have inherited mutations that lead to the disease that have yet to be identified by researchers. 

A positive test also provides less than clear-cut options. 
Increased monitoring may prove inadequate: mammography can overlook a tumor.
And preventive removal of both breasts provides no guarantee that the tissue left after surgery will remain free of cancer.

Critics of testing worry about abuse of this information by insurers and employers.
A number of states have already passed laws to prevent health insurance providers from using genetic tests to discriminate against patients.
Moreover, federal legislation that would outlaw such discrimination has been working its way through Congress.
Until some of these issues can be resolved, the National Breast Cancer Coalition, the American Society of Human Genetics and the National Advisory Council for Human Genome Research have recommended that testing be conducted only as part of an ongoing research effort.

Nevertheless, the rush to test outside the research environment has started.
One clinic-Genetics & I.V.F. Institute in Fairfax, Va., offers a test for a mutation found in Ashkenazi Jewish women.
Two companies-Myriad Genetics and OncorMed-have developed more comprehensive tests that look for a broader range of mutations in both the known breast cancer genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 .
These tests are expected to come into routine clinical use in a few years.

The medical establishment's consensus in opposing clinical testing outside a research study has already begun to weaken. 

In the May issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology , the American Society of Clinical Oncology broke ranks with other groups by recommending that testing be permitted for anyone with a family history of breast cancer.
Advocates of testing believe that ignoring available genetic information can place a patient at risk.
The ambiguities and anxieties that accompany testing, they contend, can be addressed through proper counseling.
David Sidransky, the author of the accompanying article, takes that view.
Sidransky , who is affiliated with the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and who advises OncorMed, points out that even without genetic susceptibility testing, aggressive surveillance of patients at high risk for colon cancer has led to a dramatic decrease in mortality.

Sidransky suggests that women with a breast cancer gene mutation might enter an intensive surveillance regimen and might be eligible for clinical trials of new types of chemoprevention compounds.
Knowing that one harbors a mutation may cause stress to the patient and her family, Sidransky acknowledges. 
«These issues don't compare, though, to getting metastatic breast cancer and dying from the disease,» he adds.

Other observers lack Sidransky's certitude.
Francis S., Collins, who heads the National Center for Human Genome Research, collaborated on a response to the policy statement in the Journal of Clinical Oncology .
«We are concerned,» the statement noted, «that the ability to test for hereditary susceptibility will precede the ability to inform individuals of their best medical choices, to provide counseling and education that will help individuals and families make decisions that affect quality of life, and to protect families from various forms of discrimination». 
Collins submitted the reply on behalf of the National Action Plan on Breast Cancer, a public-private partnership. 

Collins points to the National Cancer Institute's recently established National Cancer Genetics Network as a means for patients to enroll in a research study and thus learn of their genetic status while receiving counseling.
The network will give patients and their physicians a mechanism for coping with the troubling knowledge of being a carrier of a mutated gene.

Diagnosing Hubert H., Humphrey 27 Years Later

The power of the new molecular diagnostic tools became apparent in 1994, when our team of researchers at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine diagnosed Hubert H. Humphrey's bladder cancer from a 27-year-old urine sample.
Humphrey had a classic case, one that underscores the need for early detection.

In 1967, when he held the office of vice president, he found blood in his urine.
His doctors performed tests to look for abnormal cells.

They could not, however, make a definitive finding of cancer, and so aggressive treatment was delayed.
A few years later the correct diagnosis was made, and in 1976 Humphrey underwent radiation therapy and radical surgery.
He eventually died when the disease recurred.

In the experiment( diagram ), the researchers-Ralph H., Hruban, Peter van der Riet, Yener S.,Erozan and I-were given permission by Humphrey's widow, Muriel Humphrey Brown, to work with urine samples that were taken in 1967 and a sample of the tumor removed years later.

Today we know that certain mutations in the p53 gene constitute signs of bladder cancer.
But we wanted to know if such a mutation had been detectable in 1967 in Humphrey's urine.
To find out, we first confirmed that the tumor carried a p53 mutation ( bottom of diagram ).
We extracted and made copies of DNA and then sequenced (identified each nucleotide, or DNA building block) in a part of the p53 gene.
Sequencing revealed a point mutation:
one nucleotide (adenine) had been replaced by another (thymine).
We then synthesized a probe consisting of a single strand of DNA that would recognize, or pair with, DNA carrying the same mutation.
A radioactive label was attached to the DNA strands to keep track of the probe.

Separately, we made copies of the DNA from the p53 gene in the urine sample ( top of diagram ) using a technique called the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ).
We then inserted the DNA into bacteria, which grew into colonies that were placed on a nylon membrane.
In the colonies, the DNA strands were separated (so that they would be amenable to pairing with the right probe).
When the probes were placed on the membrane ( far right ), they paired with DNA in the bacteria that contained the mutation-indicating that the mutation had indeed been present in Humphrey's urine as early as 1967.

Similar methods have been used to devise the tests that are coming into clinical use for cancer detection.
Urine or blood can be subjected to a probe that pinpoints a known mutation for cancer.

Humphrey's case highlights the potential of new molecular approaches to make positive diagnoses when other techniques show equivocal results.
An earlier diagnosis could have resulted in lifesaving surgery years earlier and might have changed the course of political history.
Humphrey might have even had second thoughts about his decision to run for president against Richard M., Nixon in the 1968 campaign.

[1] Syndromes may encompass several types of cancer
