
In the process of regaining their democratic freedom the people of Catalonia also recover their institutions of self-government. 

Catalonia, exercising the right to self-government which the Constitution recognizes and guarantees to all the nationalities and regions of which Spain is composed, manifests its desire to constitute a Self-Governing Community.

At this solemn moment in time when Catalonia regains its freedom, tribute must be paid to the men and women who have helped to make this possible.

This Statute is the expression of the collective identity of Catalonia and defines its institutions and relations with the State within a framework of free solidarity with the other nationalities and regions of Spain.
This solidarity is the guarantee of the genuine unity of all the peoples of Spain.

The Catalan people proclaim freedom, justice and equality to be the supreme values of their collective life and express their desire to advance along a path of progress which will ensure a decent standard of living for all who live and work in Catalonia. 

The collective freedom of Catalonia finds in the institutions of the " Generalitat " a link with a long history of emphasis on and respect for the fundamental rights and public freedoms of individuals and peoples: a history which the people of Catalonia wish to continue, in order to make possible the creation of a forward-looking democratic society.

In order to keep faith with these principles and realize the inalienable right of Catalonia to self-government, the Catalan members of Parliament propose, the Constitutional Committee of the Congress of Deputies approves, the Catalan people reaffirm and the " Cortes Generales " ratify the following Statute.

General Provisions

Catalonia, as a nationality, in order to accede to self-government, constitutes itself as a Self-Governing Community in accordance with the Constitution [1] and with this Statute, which is its basic institutional norm.

[1 resp=ed] 1. In the exercise of the right to self-government recognized in Article 2 of the Constitution, bordering provinces with common historic, cultural and economic characteristics, island territories and provinces with historic regional status may accede to self-government and form Autonomous Communities in conformity with the provisions contained in this Title and in the respective Statutes.

The territories which in the past have, by plebiscite, approved draft Statute of Autonomy and which at the time of the promulgation of this Constitution, have provisional autonomous régimes, may proceed immediately in the manner provided in clause 2 of Article 148, when agreement to do so is reached by an absolute majority oftheir pre-autonomous higher corporate bodies, and the Government is duly informed.
The draft Statute shall be drawn up in accordance with the provisions of Article 151, clause 2, when so requested by the pre-autonomous corporate body.

1. Within the terms of the Constitution, the Statutes shall constitute the basic institutional rules of each Autonomous Community and the State shall recognize and protect them as integral pan of its legal order.

a) the name of the Community which corresponds most closely to its historic identity;
b) its territorial boundaries;
c) the name, organization and seat of its own autonomous institutions;
d) the powers assumed within the framework established by the Constitution and the basic conditions for the transfer of the services corresponding to them.


3. Amendment of the Statutes shall conform to the procedure established therein and shall in any case require the approval of the Cortes through an organic law.

2. After five years have elapsed, the Autonomous Community may, by amendment of their Statutes, successively enlarge their powers within the framework established in Article 149.

The " Generalitat " is the institution around which the self-government of Catalonia is politically organized.

3. The powers of the " Generalitat " emanate from the Constitution, this Statute and the people. 

The territory of Catalonia as a Self-Governing Community is that of the areas which make up the provinces of Barcelona, Girona, Lleida and Tarragona at the time when this Statute is promulgated.

The language proper to Catalonia is Catalan.

Catalan is the official language of Catalonia, as is Castilian, the official language of the whole of the Spanish State [2] .

[2 resp=ed] 1. Castilian is the official Spanish language of the State.
All Spaniards have the duty to know it and the right to use it.

2. The other Spanish languages shall also be official in the respective Autonomous Communities in accordance with their Statutes.

3. The wealth of the different language variations of Spain is a cultural heritage which shall be the object of special respect and protection.

The " Generalitat " shall guarantee normal and official use of both languages, adopting all measures necessary to ensure they are known, and creating those conditions which shall make possible their full equality with regard to the duties and rights of the citizens of Catalonia.

The speech of the Valley of Aran shall be taught and shall receive special respect and protection.

The Catalan flag is the traditional one of four red stripes on a yellow background [3] .

[3 resp=ed] 2. The Statutes may recognize flags and ensigns of the Autonomous Communities. 
These shall be used together with the flag of Spain on their public buildings and in their official ceremonies.

The " Generalitat " of Catalonia shall divide its territorial organization into municipalities and districts (" comarques ") although it may also set up larger administrative districts.

Territorial units may also be set up based on town planning and metropolitan factors, as may others of a functional nature or those designed for specific purposes.

A Parliamentary Law shall regulate the territorial organization of Catalonia in accordance with this Statute, guaranteeing the autonomy of the various territorial units.

The stipulations of the foregoing paragraphs shall be interpreted without prejudicing the organization of the province as a local unit and a territorial division for implementing the activities of the State, in accordance with the provisions of articles 137 and 141 of the Constitution [4] .

[4 resp=ed] The State is organized territorially into municipalities, provinces and any Autonomous communities that may be constituted.
All these bodies shall enjoy self-government for the management of their respective interests.

1. The province is a local entity, with its own legal personality, determined by the grouping of municipalities and by territorial division, in order to carry out the activities of the State.
Any alteration of the provincial boundaries must be approved by the Cortes Generales by means of an organic law.

2. The government and autonomous administration of the provinces shall be entrusted to Provincial Councils (" Diputaciones ") or other corporations that are representative in character.

3. Groups of municipalities other than those of the provincesmay be formed.

4. In the archipelagoes, the islands shall also have their own administration in the form of " Cabildos " or Councils.

For the purposes of this Statute, the political status of Catalans shall be accorded to all Spanish citizens who, in accordance with the general laws of the State, are legally resident in any of the municipalities of Catalonia.

As Catalans, Spanish citizens resident abroad shall also enjoy the political rights defined in this Statute provided that their last legal place of abode was in Catalonia and that they give proof of their status in the corresponding Spanish Consulate. 
Their descendants registered as Spaniards shall also enjoy these rights, if they so request, in a manner to be determined by the Law of the State.

The laws and regulations of the " Generalitat ", together with Catalan civil law, shall be in force in the whole territory, without prejudicing the exceptions which may be established in particular cases, situations that come under the heading of personal status or other laws of an extra-territorial nature.

Foreigners who acquire Spanish nationality shall be subject to Catalan civil law while they are legally resident in Catalonia, unless they express a desire to the contrary.

The citizens of Catalonia are holders of the fundamental rights and duties laid down in the Constitution [5] .

[5 resp=ed] 1. Human dignity, man's inviolable and inherent rights, the free development of his personality, respect for the law and for the rights of others are fundamental to political order and social peace.

2. The principles relating to the fundamental rights and 4liberties recognized by the Constitution shall be interpreted in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international treaties and agreements thereofratified by Spain.

The whole of Title I (articles 10-38) is about fundamental rights and duties.

It is incumbent on the " Generalitat ", as a public authority, to develop conditions within its area of jurisdiction such that the freedom and equality of individuals and the groups of which they form part may be effective and real, to remove any obstacles which may prevent or impede their full development and to facilitate the participation of all its citizens in political, economic, cultural and social life.

Jurisdiction of the " Generalitat "

The " Generalitat " of Catalonia shall have sole jurisdiction over the following matters:
- Organization of its own institutions of self- government, within the framework of this Statute.
- Preservation, modification and development of Catalan civil law.
- Procedural laws and laws concerning administrative procedure arising from the particular features of the substantive law of Catalonia or from the special characteristics of the organization of the " Generalitat "
- Culture.
- Historical, artistic, monumental, architectural, archaeological and scientific heritage, without prejudicing the provisions laid down under point 28 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [6] .

- Archives, libraries, museums, newspaper libraries and other centres of cultural reference not under State control. 
Conservatories of Music and Fine Arts services of interest to the Self-Governing Community.

- Research, without prejudicing the stipulations laid down under point 15 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [7] .
Those Academies whose seat is in Catalonia.

- Local Government, without prejudicing the provisions laid down under point 18 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [8] .
Alterations to municipal boundaries and the official names of municipalities and other place names.

- Territorial and coastline planning, housing and town planning.
- Woodland, forestry resources and services, livestock trails and pastures, specially protected natural and mountain areas, in accordance with the provisions laid down under point 23 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [9] .

- Health, taking into account the stipulations of article 17 of this Statute.

- Tourism.
- Public works not legally classified as being of general interest to the State or whose execution does not affect any other Self-Governing Community.

- Roads and highways whose routes are entirely contained within the territory of Catalonia.
- Railways, transport by land, sea, river and cable; ports, heliports, airports and the Meteorological Service of Catalonia, without prejudicing the provisions laid down under points 20 and 21 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [10] .
Hiring centres and loading terminals for transport services.

- Hydraulic projects, canals and irrigation works, whenever the waters flow entirely within the territory of Catalonia; installations for the production, distribution and transportation of energy, whenever such transportation does not leave the territory and its use does not affect any other province or Self-Governing Community; mineral, thermal and underground waters.
All of these without prejudicing the provisions laid down under point 25 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [11] .

- Fishing in inland waters, the shellfish industry, aquiculture, hunting and lake and lake fishing.
- Handicrafts.
- Pharmaceutical regulations, without prejudicing the provisions laid down under point 16 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [12] .

- Setting up and planning of centres for dealings in commodities and securities, in accordance with commercial legislation.

- Co-operatives, mutual benefit societies not included in the Social Security system and other co-operative associations in accordance with commercial legislation.

- Real Estate Chambers, Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Shipping, without prejudicing the provisions laid down under point 10 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution [13] .

- Professional Associations and the exercise of degree-qualified professions, without prejudicing the provisions of articles 36 and 139 of the Constitution [14] .

- Foundations and associations of an educational, cultural, artistic, charitable, welfare or similar nature, whose activities are carried on chiefly in Catalonia.

- Social welfare.
- Youth.
- Promotion of women.
- Public institutions for the protection and guardianship of minors, with constant respect for civil, penal and penitentiary legislation.
- Sport and leisure.
- Advertising, without prejudicing the laws passed by the State for specific sectors and media.
- Entertainment.
- Casinos, gaming and betting, excluding the state system of sports betting for charity (football pools).
- Statistics of interest to the " Generalitat ".
- Other matters expressly stated in this Statute as being under the sole jurisdiction of the " Generalitat " and those of a similar nature which are transferred to it by the State through an Organic Law.


[6 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

28. Protection of Spain's cultural and artistic heritage and national monuments against exportation and despoliation, museums, libraries and archives belonging to the State, without prejudice to their management by the Autonomous Communities.

[7 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

15.Promotion and general co- ordination of scientific and technical research.

[8 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

18. The bases of the legal system of Public Administrations and the statutes of their public officials which shall, in any case, guarantee that ali persons under said administration will receive equal treatment; the common administrative procedure, without prejudice to the special features of the Autonomous communities own organizations; legislation on compulsory expropriation, basic legislation on contracts and administrative concessions and the system of liability of ail Public Administrations.

[9 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

23. Basic legislation on environmental protection, without prejudice to the powers of the Autonomous communities to establish additional protective measures basic legislation on woodlands, forestry, and cattle trails.

[10 resp=ed] 1. The state holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

20. The Merchant Navy and the registering of ships; lighting of coasts and signals at sea; general-purpose ports;general purpose airports; control of the air space, airtraffic and transport; meteorological services and registration of aircraft.

21. Railways and land transport passing through the territory of more than one Autonomous community general system of communications, motor vehicle traffic, Post Office services and telecommunications; air and underwater cables and radiocommunications.

[11 resp=ed] 1. The state holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

25. Bases of the organization of mining and energy.

[12 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

16. External health measures, bases and general coordination of health matters; legislation on pharmaceutical products.

[13 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

10. Customs and tariff regulations; foreign trade.

[14 resp=ed] The law shall regulate the special features of the legal status of the Professional Colleges and the exercise of the degree professions. 
The internal structure and operation of the Colleges must be democratic.

1. All Spaniards have the same rights and obligations in any part of the State territory.

2. No authority may adopt measures which directly or indirectly obstruct freedom of movement and settlement of persons and free movement of goods throughout the Spanish territory.

Within the framework of the basic legislation of the State and, when appropriate, under the terms established therein, it is incumbent upon the " Generalitat " to develop and implement legislation in the following areas: 
- Juridical system and system of liability of the administration of the " Generalitat " and the public bodies dependent on it, in addition to the Statute of their civil servants.

- Compulsory expropriation, administrative contractsandconcessions, within the area under the jurisdiction of the " Generalitat ".

- Retention for the public sector of essential resources or services, especially in the case of monopolies, and the auditing of companies when the general interest so demands.
- Planning of credit, banking and insurance.
- Mining and energy organization.
- Protection of the environment, without prejudicing the powers of the " Generalitat " to lay down additional standards of protection.
- Fisheries planning.

It is incumbent on the " Generalitat " to develop the legislation of the system of Municipal Popular Consultations within the area of Catalonia, in accordance with the provisions of the Laws referred to in paragraph 3 of article 92 and point 18, paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution, [15] it being the responsibility of the State to authorize such consultations.

[15 resp=ed] 3.An organic law shall regulate the terms and procedures for the different kinds of referendum provided for in this Constitution.

1.The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

18. The bases of the legal system of Public Administrations and the statutes of their public officials which shall, in any case, guarantee that all persons under said administrations will receive equal treatment; the common administrative procedure, without prejudice to the special features of the Autonomous Communities' own organizations, legislation on compulsory expropriation; basic legislation on contracts and administrative concessions and the system of liability of all Public Administrations.

It is incumbent on the " Generalitat " to implement State legislation in the following areas:
- Prisons.
- Labour affairs, assuming the powers, jurisdiction and services currently held in this area at executive level by the State in respect of labour relations, without prejudicing the State's powers of inspection.
The State retains all powers as regards internal and external population movement and national employment funds, without prejudicing whatever State laws may lay down on these matters.

- Copyright and patents.
- Appointment of bill brokers, stockbrokers and commercial brokers.
Intervention, when appropriate, in drawing up the corresponding demarcations.

- Weights and measures.
Hallmarks.

- International fairs held in Catalonia.

- Museums, archives and libraries under State management when the State does not reserve this management for itself.

- Ports and airports classified as being of general interest, whenever the State does not reserve their direct management for itself.
- Planning of the transportation of goods and passengers whose points of departure and destination lie within the territory of the Self-Governing Community, even though such transportation may be effected on infrastructures belonging to the State, as referred to under point 21 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution, [16] without prejudicing such direct implementation as the State may reserve for itself.

- Rescue work at sea and dumping of industrial waste and pollutants in State territorial waters off the Catalan coast. 

- Other questions expressly stated in this Statute as coming under the jurisdiction of the " Generalitat " and those of this nature which may be transferred to it by the State through an organic law.


[16 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

21. Railways and land transport passing through the territory of more than one Autonomous Community, general system of communications; motor vehicle traffic, Post Office services and telecommunications, air and underwater cables and radiocommunications.

In accordance with the bases and planning of the general economic activity and monetary policy of the State, it is incumbent on the " Generalitat " under the terms of the provisions of articles 38, 131 and points 11 and 13 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution, [17] to hold sole jurisdiction over the following areas:
- 1) Planning of economic activity in Catalonia.
- Industry, without prejudicing whatever State laws may determine for reasons of safety, health or military interest, and the regulations concerning industries subject to legislation on mines, hydrocarbons and nuclear power.
The power to authorize the import of foreign technology lies solely with the State. 

- The development and implementation in Catalonia of plans drawn up by the State for the restructuring of industrial sectors. 

- Agriculture and livestock farming.
- Internal trade, protection of the consumer and user, without perjudicing the general policy on prices and legislation on defence from competition.
" Appelations côntrolées " in collaboration with the State.

- Corporate, public and territorial credit institutions and Savings Banks.

- The public economic sector of the "Generalitat', in so far as this is not envisaged under other laws in this Statute. 


[17 resp=ed] Free enterprise is recognized within the framework of a market economy.
The public authorities shall guarantee and protect its exercise and the safeguarding of productivity in accordance with the demands of the economy in general and, as the case may be, of its planning.

1. The State, through the law, shall be able to plan general economic activity in order to meet collective needs, balance andharmonize regional and sectorial development and stimulate the growth of income and wealth and its more equitable distribution.

2. The Government shall draft planning projects in accordance with the forecasts supplied by the Autonomous Communities and the advice and collaboration of trade unions and other professional, employers' and financial organizations.
A council shall be set up for this purpose, whose composition and duties shall be established by law.

1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

11. Monetary system: foreign currency, exchange and convertibility; bases for the regulations concerning credit, banking and insurance.

13. Bases and co-ordination of general planning of economic activity.

The " Generalitat " shall also participate in the management of the State's public economic sector, in appropriate cases and activities.

The " Generalitat " may set up an Autonomous Police Force within the framework of this Statute and that of the Organic Law provided for in article 149, 1.29 of the Constitution [18] for matters not specifically regulated in the former.

[18 resp=ed] 1. The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

29. Public safety without prejudice to the possibility of creation of police forces by the Autonomous Communities, in the manner to be laid down in their respective Statutes and within the framework to be established by an organic law.

The Autonomous Police Force of the " Generalitat " shall have the following functions:
- The protection of property and persons and the maintaining of law and order.
- The guarding and protecting of the buildings and installations of the " Generalitat ".
- The remaining functions provided for in the Organic Law referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.


It is incumbent on the " Generalitat " to exercise overall command of the Autonomous Police Force and to co-ordinate the activities of Local Police Forces.

The State Security Forces and Corps under State control shall have sole responsibility for police services of an extra- and supra-community nature, such as guarding ports, airports, coasts and frontiers, customs, controlling the entry and exit from national territory of Spaniards and foreigners, the legal framework for foreign residents, extradition and expulsion, emigration and immigration, passports, national identity cards, traffic of arms and explosives, fiscal protection of the State, smuggling and tax fraud and other functions directly assigned to them by article 104 of the Constitution [19] and by the Organic Law which is to develop it further.

[19 resp=ed] 1. The Security Forces and Corps serving under the Government shall have as their mission the protection of the free exercise of rights and liberties and the guaranteeing of the safety of citizens.

2. An organic law shall determine the duties, basic principles of action and statutes of the Security Forces and Corps.

The Judiciary Police and Corps which perform this function shall depend on the Judges, the Courts and the Office of the Public Prosecutor in respect of the functions set out in article 126 of the Constitution [20] and in the terms provided for in the procedural laws.

[20 resp=ed] The police of the Judiciary are answerable to the Judges, the Courts and the Public Prosecutor when discharging their duties of crime detection and the discovery and apprehension of criminals, under the terms to be laid down by the law.

The Security Council is hereby set up, comprising an equal number of representatives of the State Government and the " Generalitat " for the purpose of co-ordinating the activities of the " Generalitat " Police and the State Security Forces and Corps.

The Security Council shall determine the Statute, Regulations, staff, numbers and recruitment of the Police Force of the " Generalitat " whose commanding officers shall be appointed from among the Chiefs and Officers of the State Armed Forces and State Security Forces and Corps who, while serving in the Police Force of the " Generalitat " shall be placed in the administrative situation to be established in the Organic Law referred to in paragraph 1 of this article or in the situation that the State Government may determine, and while in this situation shall not be subject to military law.
Licences for arms shall in all cases be the responsibility of the State alone.

Using the powers and exercising the jurisdiction assigned to it by the Constitution, the Government shall take control of all the services included in the previous article and the Security Forces and Corps may intervene in functions ascribed to the Police Force of the " Generalitat " in the following cases:
- When called upon to do so by the " Generalitat " intervention shall cease at the request of the " Generalitat ".

- On their own initiative, when they consider that the State interest is gravely endangered, and with the approval of the Security Council.


In cases of particular urgency, the State Security Forces and Corps may intervene under the sole responsibility of the State Government, which shall report to the " Cortes Generales ".
The " Cortes Generales ", through constitutional procedures, may exercise the powers vested in them.

In the event of the declaration of states of alarm, exceptions or siege, all police Forces and Corps shall be placed under the direct orders of the civil or military authorities, as the case may be, in accordance with the legislation regulating such matters. 

It is fully within the jurisdiction of the " Generalitat " to regulate and administer education in all its scope, levels, degrees, kinds and specialities, within the area of its jurisdiction, without prejudicing the provisions of article 27 of the Constitution [21] and Organic Laws which in accordance with the first paragraph of article 81 therein, [22] may develop it, or the powers assigned to the State under point 30 of paragraph 1 of article 149 of the Constitution, [23] and the inspection necessary for its proper implementation and safeguarding.

[21 resp=ed] 1. Everyone is entitled to education.
Freedom of instruction as recognized.

2. Education shall have as its objective the full development of the human character compatible with respect for the democratic principles of co-existence and for the basic rights and freedoms. 

3. The public authorities guarantee the right of parents to ensure that their children receive religious and moral instruction that is in accordance with their own convictions.

4. Elementary education is compulsory and free.

5. The public authorities guarantee the right of everyone to education, through general planning of education, with the effective participation of all parties concerned and the setting up of teaching establishments.

6. The right of individuals and legal entities to set up teaching establishments in recognized, provided they respect Constitutional principles.

7. Teachers, parents and, when appropriate, pupils, shall share in the control and management of all the centres maintained by the Administration out of public funds, under the terms to be laid down by the law.

8. The public authorities shall inspect and standardize the educational system in order to guarantee compliance with the law.

9. The public authorities shall give aid to teaching establishments which meet the requirements to be laid down by the law.

10. The autonomy of the Universities is recognized, under the terms to be laid down by the law.

[22 resp=ed] 1. Organic laws are those relating to the development of fundamental rights and public liberties, those which establish Statutes of Autonomy and the general electoral system, and other laws provided for in the Constitution.

[23 resp=ed] 1.The State holds exclusive jurisdiction over the following matters:

30. Regulation of the conditions relative to the obtaining issuing and standardization of academic degrees and professional qualifications and basic rules for the development of Article 27 of the Constitution, in order to guarantee the fulfilment of the obligations of the public authorities in this matter.

Within the framework of the basic laws of the State, it is the responsibility of the " Generalitat " to develop and implement legislation for the system of radio and television broadcasting in the terms and cases established by the law which is to regulate the Legal Statute for Radio and Television.

It is also incumbent on it, within the framework of the basic laws of the State, to develop and implement legislation for the press system and, in general, that of all the media for social communication.

In the terms established in the foregoing paragraphs of this article, the " Generalitat " may regulate, create and maintain its own television, radio and press and, in general, all the media for social communication used for the accomplishing of its ends.

It is the responsibility of the " Generalitat " of Catalonia to develop and implement the basic legislation of the State on internal health matters.

- Develop and implement the basic legislation of the State, except for the laws which constitute the Social Security's economic organization.

- Manage the said economic organization of the Social Security.



The " Generalitat " shall also be responsible for the implementation of State legislation on pharmaceutical products.

Within its territory, the " Generalitat " of Catalonia may organize and administer for these purposes all the services connected with the matters expressed above and shall supervise institutions, organizations and foundations connected with Health and Social Security matters.
The State shall reserve for itself the inspection facilities which shall enable it to fulfil the duties and powers contained in this article. 

The " Generalitat " of Catalonia shall adapt the exercise of the powers it may assume in Health and Social Security matters to criteria of democratic participation on the part of all those involved, and also of the Employees' Unions and Employers' Associations in the terms to be established by the law.

- To exercise all the powers which the Organic Laws of the Judiciary and the General Council of the Judiciary recognize or assign to the State Government.

- To establish the boundaries of the territorial divisions of the jurisdictional agencies of Catalonia and to determine their seat.

- To contribute to the organization of common law and traditional courts and to the setting up of magistrates,courtsinall cases in accordance with the provisions of the Organic Law of the Judiciary.



The High Court of Justice of Catalonia, with which the present Territorial Court of Barcelona shall be merged, is the organ of justice which shall embody judicial organization in its territorial area and before which all procedural appeals are to be heard under the terms of article 152 of the Constitution [24] and in accordance with this Statute.

[24 resp=ed] 1. In the case of Statutes passed by means of the procedure referred to in the foregoing article, the institutional Autonomous organization shall be based on a Legislative Assembly elected by universal suffrage in accordance with a system of proportional representation which shall assure, moreover, the representation of the various areas of the territory; a Governing Council with executive and administrative functions and a President elected by the Assembly from among its members and appointed by the King.
The President shall be responsible for directing the Governing Council, which constitutes the supreme representation of the respective Community as well as the State's ordinary representation in the latter.
The President and the members of the Governing Council shall be politically accountable to the Assembly.

A High Court of Justice, without prejudice to the jurisdiction exercised by the Supreme Court, shall head the Judiciary within the territorial area of the Autonomous Community.
The Statutes of the Autonomous Communities shall establish the circumstances and manner in which they will participate in the organization of the judicial demarcations of the territory all of which must be in conformity with the provisions of the organic law on judicial power and compatible with its unity and independence.

Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 123, successive proceedings, if any, shall be held before judicial bodies located in the same territory of the Autonomous Community as that in which the competent Court of the First Instance is located.

- In civil cases, to all instances and degrees, including appeals for case review and High-Court appeals in matters of Catalan Civil Law.

- In penal and social cases, to all instances and degrees, with the exception of High-Court appeals and appeals for case review.

- In cases of administrative litigation, to all instances anddegrees, whenever acts handed down by the Executive Council orGovernment or by the Administration of the " Generalitat " are involved, in matters where legislation is the sole responsibility of the Self-Governing Community, and in the first appeal, when acts handed down by the State Administration in Catalonia are involved.

- To questions of jurisdiction among the different judicial organs of Catalonia.
- To appeals concerning the classification of documents referring specifically to Catalan law which shall have access to Real Estate Registers.



In other matters, appeals may be lodged, when appropriate, with the Supreme Court.
Such appeals shall comprise the High Court appeal, or whichever is appropriate according to State Law, including the appeal for revision.
The Supreme Court shall also solve disputes affecting powers and jurisdiction between the Courts of Catalonia and those of the rest of Spain.

The President of the High Court of Justice of Catalonia shall be appointed by the King after being proposed by the General Council of the Judiciary.
The President of the " Generalitat " shall order publication of any such appointment in the Diari Oficial de la Generalitat .

The appointment of Magistrates, Judges and Secretaries of the High Court of Justice of Catalonia shall be carried out in the manner provided for in the organic laws of the Judiciary and of the General Council of the Judiciary.

At the request of the " Generalitat ", the competent agency shall organize public competitions and examinations to fill the vacancies for Magistrates, Judges, judicial Secretaries and other staff in the service of the Administration of Justice in Catalonia, in accordance with the provisions of the Organic Law of the Judiciary.

Competitions, examinations and appointments to fill vacancies in Catalonia for Magistrates, Judges, judicial Secretaries and other staff in the service of the Administration of Justice, shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Organic Laws of the Judiciary and of the General Council of the Judiciary.
Specialized knowledge of Catalan law shall be a preferred merit. 
Under no circumstances may exceptions be made on grounds of origin or abode.

The organizing and running of the office of Public Prosecutor is the exclusive responsibility of the State, in accordance with the general laws.

Notaries public and Real Estate and Commercial registrars shall be appointed by the " Generalitat ", in accordance with the laws of the State.
Candidates for vacancies as notaries shall be admitted on an equal basis, whether they practise within the territory of Catalonia or in any other part of Spain.

In these competitions and examinations, specialized knowledge of Catalan law shall be a special merit.
Under no circumstances may exceptions be made on grounds of origin or abode.

The " Generalitat " shall participate in the fixing of the demarcations for the Real Estate and Commercial Registers in order to adapt them to the provisions arising from the application of article 18, paragraph 2 of this Statute.
It shall also take part in determining notary demarcations and the number of notaries, in accordance with the provisions of State laws.

All the powers mentioned in the foregoing articles and in others in this Statute shall be understood to refer to the territory of Catalonia.

In the exercise of its exclusive jurisdictions, the " Generalitat " is vested, as the case may be, with legislative power the power to lay down regulations and executive authority, including that of inspection.
In the case of the attributions set out in article 11 of this Statute, or with the same character in any other of its precepts their exercise is to be subject to the laws and regulations issued by the State in developing its legislation.

The " Generalitat " of Catalonia shall include in its organization the appropriate services to enable it to carry out the functions assigned to it by this Statute. 

In matters falling under the exclusive jurisdiction of the "Generalitat', Catalan law shall be applicable in the territory of Catalonia in preference to any other.

In the absence of Catalan law, State law shall be applied on a supplementary basis.

In determining the sources of civil law, the State shall respect the norms of Catalan civil law.

For the management and provision of services in matters falling under its exclusive jurisdiction, the " Generalitat " may conclude agreements with other Self-Governing Communities.
These agreements must be approved by the Parliament of Catalonia and communicated to the " Cortes Generales " and shall come into force thirty days after such notification, unless the Cortes agree within the said period of time that, on the grounds of its contents, the agreement should follow the procedure laid down in the second paragraph of this article, as a co-operation agreement.

The " Generalitat " may also establish cooperation agreements with other Self-Governing Communities, once the prior authorization of the Cortes Generales has been obtained.

The " Generalitat " of Catalonia shall adopt all measures necessary for the implementation of international treaties and agreements in so far as they affect matters falling under its jurisdiction, according to this Statute. 

As the Catalan language is the heritage of other territories and communities, in addition to the links and correspondence which academic and cultural institutions may maintain, the " Generalitat " may request the Government to conclude, and refer, if need be, to the Cortes Generales for authorization, such treaties or agreements as shall make possible the establishment of cultural relations with the States where such territories are located and such communities reside.

The " Generalitat " shall be informed of the concluding of treaties and agreements, as well as bills for Customs legislation in so far as they affect matters of specific interest to it.

The " Generalitat " may request the Government to transfer or delegate powers not assumed in this Statute.

The " Generalitat " may also request of the " Cortes Generales " that the framework laws which they may pass in matters falling under the exclusive jurisdiction of the State should expressly assign to the " Generalitat " the power to legislate on the development of such laws, under the terms of paragraph 1 of article 150 of the Constitution [25] .

[25 resp=ed] 1. The Cortes Generales , in matters of State jurisdiction, shall confer upon all or any of the Autonomous Communities the power to enact legislation for themselves within the framework of the principles, bases and guidelines established by State law.
Without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the Courts, each basic law shall contain the method of control by the Cortes Generales over the Autonomous Communities' legislation.

The power to make the foregoing requests is vested in the Parliament of Catalonia, together with that of determining to which agency of the " Generalitat " the transferred or delegated power should be assigned in each particular case.

The " Generalitat "

The " Generalitat " is composed of a Parliament, the President of the " Generalitat " and the Executive Council or Government.

The laws of Catalonia shall regulate the functioning of these institutions in accordance with the Constitution and this Statute.

Parliament

Parliament represents the people of Catalonia and exercises legislative power, approves the Budgets, stimulates and controls political and government action and exercises the remaining powers assigned to it by the Constitution, and in accordance with the latter and the Statute, a law to be approved by Parliament itself. 

Parliament is inviolable.

Parliament has its seat in the city of Barcelona, but may hold sessions in other places in Catalonia in the manner and cases to be laid down by the law.

Parliament shall be elected for a term of four years, by universal, free, equal, direct and secret suffrage, in accordance with the electoral law to be approved by Parliament itself.
The electoral system shall be one of proportional representation and shall also ensure adequate representation of all the areas of the territory of Catalonia.

The members of the Parliament of Catalonia shall be inviolable with regard to the votes and opinions they may express in carrying out their duties.

During their term of office, they may not be arrested or detained for offences committed in the territory of Catalonia, unless taken in the act of committal.
In all cases, it shall be incumbent on the High Court of Justice of Catalonia to decide on their indictment detention, prosecution and trial.
Outside this territory, penal responsibility shall be required in the same terms before the Criminal Division of the State Supreme Court.

The Deputies shall not be bound by imperative mandate. 

Parliament shall have a President ("Speaker"), a Presiding Council, and a Standing Committee.
The standing orders of Parliament shall regulate their composition and election.

It shall function in plenary session and in committee. 
The standing committees may draw up and approve laws, without prejudicing the power of the plenum to call for debate and approval at any time during the legislative process.

The standing orders shall specify the minimum number of Deputies for the formation of Parliamentary Groups, the intervention of these in the legislative process and the functions of their committee of spokesmen.
The Parliamentary Groups shall form part of all the committees, in proportion to the number of their members.

Parliament shall meet for ordinary and extraordinary sessions. 
Extraordinary sessions shall be convened by the President, with the agreement of the Standing Committee or at the request of one quarter of the Deputies or by as many Parliamentary Groups as may be determined by the standing orders.
It shall also meet in extraordinary sessions at the request of the President of the " Generalitat ".

For agreements to be valid, both in the plenum and in committee, they must be adopted at statutory meetings attended by the majority of members and with the approval of the majority of those present, except in those cases where the standing orders or the law require a larger quorum.

The right to initiate legislation lies with the Deputies, the Executive Council or Government and, under the terms to be established by a law of Catalonia, by the political entities representing the supra-municipal districts of the territorial organization of Catalonia.
Popular initiative as regards the submitting of bills for consideration by the Parliament of Catalonia shall be regulated by the latter through a law, in accordance with the provisions of the organic law provided for in article 87.3, of the Constitution [26] .

[26 resp=ed] 3. An organic law shall establish the manner in which popular initiative in connection with the submitting of nongovernmental bills shall be regulated, as well as the requirements therefore.
In any case, no fewer than 500,000 authenticated signatures shall be required.
This initiative may not touch on matters concerning organic laws, taxation, international affairs or the prerogative of granting pardons.

The Parliament of Catalonia exercises legislative power by the drafting of laws.

This power can only be delegated to the Executive Council or Government in the same terms as those established by articles 82, 83 and 84 of the Constitution [27] for the contingency of delegation to the State Government by the " Cortes Generales ".

[27 resp=ed] 1. The Cortes Generales may delegate to the Government the power to issue rules with the force of law on specific matters not included in the foregoing article.

2. Legislative delegation must be granted by means of a basic law when its purpose is that of drawing up texts comprising various articles, or by an ordinary law when it is a matter of consolidating several legal texts into one.

3. Legislative delegation must be expressly granted to the Government for specific purposes and with a fixed time limit for its exercise.
The delegation shall expire when the Government having availed itself thereof, has published the appropriate regulations.
It may not be construed as having been granted implicitly or for an indeterminate period.
Nor shall sub-delegation to authorities other than the Government itself be authorized.

4. Enabling laws shall precisely define the purpose and scope of legislative delegation, as well as the principles and criteria to be followed in exercising it.

5. Authorization for consolidating legal texts shall determine the legislative scope implicit in the delegation, specifying if it is restricted to the mere formulation of a single text or whether it covers regulating, clarifying and harmonizing the legal texts that are to be consolidated.

6. The delegation laws may establish additional control formulas in each case, without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the Courts.

a) authorize the modification of the basic law itself
b) grant power to enact retroactive regulations
.

In the event that a non-govermental bill or amendment is contrary to currently valid legislative delegation, the Government may oppose its passage.
In this case, a non- governmental bill may be submitted for the total or partial repeal of the delegation law.

The laws of Catalonia shall be promulgated, on behalf of the King, by the President of the " Generalitat " who shall order their publication in the Diari Oficial de la Generalitat within fifteen days of their adoption, and in the Boletín Oficial del Estado .
The date of their coming into force shall be that of their publication in the Diari Oficial de la Generalitat .
The official Castilian version shall be that drafted by the " Generalitat ".

- To appoint the Senators who are to represent the " Generalitat " in the Senate.
Such appointments shall be made at a special sitting convened for the purpose and in proportion to the number of DeputiesineachParliamentary Group. 
The Senators appointed according to the provisions of this article must be Deputies of the Parliament of Catalonia and shall cease to be Senators, apart from the stipulations of the Constitution [27] on this issue, once they cease to be Deputies.

- To draft bills to be submitted to the Presiding Council of the Congress of Deputies and to nominate a maximum of three Parliamentary Deputies responsible for defending them.

- To request the State Government to adopt a bill.

- To lodge unconstitutionality appeals and to appear before the Constitutional Court in the conflicts of jurisdiction referred to in paragraph c) of point 1 of article 161 of the Constitution [28] .



[27bis resp=ed] 6. The Senate is elected for four years.
The Senators' term of office shall end four years after their election or on the day that the House is dissolved.

[28 resp=ed] 1. The Constitutional Court has jurisdiction over the whole of Spanish territory and is competent to hear:

c) conflicts of jurisdiction between the State and the Autonomous Communities or between the Autonomous Communities themselves.

Without prejudicing the institution provided for in article 54 of the Constitution [29] and coordination with it, Parliament may appoint a " Síndic de Greuges " ("Ombudsman") for the defence of the fundamental rights and public freedoms of the people, who may, in this connection, supervise the activities of the administration of the " Generalitat ".
A law of Catalonia shall establish the organization and functioning of his role.

[29 resp=ed] An organic law shall regulate the institution of Defender of the People, who shall be a high commissionerof the Cortes Generales appointed by them to defend the rights contained in this Title; for this purpose he may supervise Administration activities and report thereofto the Cortes Generales .

The President

The President shall be elected by Parliament from among its members and be appointed by the King.

The President of the " Generalitat " directs and co- ordinates the action of the Executive Council or Government and embodies the highest representation of the " Generalitat " and the ordinary representation of the State in Catalonia.

The President may temporarily delegate executive functions to one of the Councillors.

The President shall, in all respects, be politically accountable to Parliament.

A law of Catalonia shall determine the manner of the election of the President, his personal statute and his powers.

The Executive Council or Government

The Council, as the collegiate governing body with executive and administrative functions shall be regulated by a law of Catalonia which shall determine its composition, the statute and manner of appointing and dismissing its members and their powers.

The Council is politically accountable as a whole to Parliament, without prejudicing the direct responsibility of each Councillor for the running of his own department.

The seat of the Council shall be in the city of Barcelona, and its agencies, services and dependencies may be set up in different locations in Catalonia on the basis of criteria of decentralization, deconcentration and co-ordination of functions. 

All the laws, ordinances and acts proceeding from the Executive Council or Government and from the Administration of the " Generalitat " which so required shall be published in the Diari Oficial de la Generalitat .
This publication shall be sufficient, for all purposes, for the validity of acts and the coming into force of the ordinances and laws of the " Generalitat ".
As regards publication in the Boletín Oficial del Estado , whatever is prescribed by the corresponding State law shall be adhered to.

The President of the " Generalitat " and the Councillors may not be arrested or detained during their term of office for offences committed in the territory of Catalonia unless taken in the act of committal.
In all cases, it shall be incumbent on the High Court of Justice of Catalonia to decide on their indictment, detention, prosecution and trial.
Outside Catalan territory, penal responsibility shall be required in the same terms before the Criminal Division of the State Supreme Court.

The Council may lodge unconstitutionality appeals.
It may also, on its own initiativeor after the prior agreement of Parliament, appear before the Constitutional Court in conflicts of jurisdiction referred to in paragraph c) of point 1 of article 161 of the Constitution [30] .

[30 resp=ed] 1. The Constitutional Court has jurisdiction over the whole of Spanish territory and is competent to hear:

c) conflicts of jurisdiction between the State and the Autonomous Communities or between the Autonomous Communities themselves.

Exercising control over the " Generalitat "

The laws of Catalonia shall be exempt from administrative law appeals and subject to control in respect of their constitutionality only to the Constitutional Court.

Appeals to administrative law jurisdiction may be lodged against acts and agreements and the laws emanating from the executive and administrative agencies of the " Generalitat ".

Without prejudicing the provisions of paragraph 1 of the previous article, a law of Catalonia shall set up and regulate the functioning of a body of a consultative nature which shall issue an opinion, in the cases to be determined by the law, on the conformity with this Statute of government or non-government bills referred to the Catalan Parliament for debate and approval. 

The prior condition for the lodging of an unconstitutionality appeal with the Constitutional Court by the Executive Council or Government of the " Generalitat " or by the Parliament of Catalonia shall be an advisory opinion from the said body.

Without prejudicing the provisions of article 136 and paragraph d) of article 153 of the Constitution, [31] the Trusteeship in Accounts for Catalonia is hereby set up.
A law of Catalonia shall regulate its organization and functioning and shall establish the guarantees, rules and procedures for the rendering of the accounts of the " Generalitat ".
This law must be submitted to Parliament for approval.

[31 resp=ed] 1. The Court of Audit is the supreme body charged with auditing the State's accounts and financial management, as well as those of the public sector.

It shall be directly answerable to the Cortes Generales and shall discharge its duties by delegation of the latter when examining and verifying the General Accounts of the State.

2. The State Accounts and those of the State public sector shall be submitted to the Court of Audit and shall be audited by the latter.
The Court of Audit, without prejudice to its own jurisdiction, shall remit an annual report to the Cortes Generales in which it shall, when applicable, inform the latter of any infringements may, in its opinion, have been committed, or any liabilities that may have been incurred.

3. The members of the Court of Audit shall enjoy the same independence and protection from dismissal and shall be subject to the same disabilities as judges.

4. An organic law shall regulate the composition, organization and duties of the Court of Audit.

Control over the agencies of the Autonomous Communities shall be exercised by:

d) the Court of Audit, with regard to financial and budgetary matters.

Finance and the Economy

1) The patrimony of the " Generalitat " at the time the Statute is passed.
2) Property belonging to services transferred to the " Generalitat ".
3) Properly acquired by the " Generalitat " by any valid legal means.


The patrimony of the "Generalitat', its administration, defence and preservation shall be regulated by a law of Catalonia. 

- The proceeds from the taxes established by the " Generalitat ".

- The yield from taxes handed over by the State as set out in the sixth Additional Provision and from all those whose transfer is approved by the Cortes Generales .

- A percentage share of the total State revenue from direct and indirect taxes, including fiscal monopolies.

- The yield from its own levies on special facilities and forthe provision of direct services by the " Generalitat ", whether of its own creation or as the result of the transfers of State services.

- Special contributions established by the " Generalitat " in the exercise of its powers.
- Surcharges on State taxes.
- When appropriate, income from the Interterritorial Clearing Fund.
- Other allocations charged to the General Budget of the State.
- The issue of public debt and recourse to credit.
- Income from the patrimony of the " Generalitat ".
- Income from private law; legacies and donations; subsidies. 
- Fines and remuneratory sanctions within the area of its jurisdiction.


When the transfer of services is complete, or after this Statute has been in force for six years, if the " Generalitat " so requests, the annual share in State revenue laid down in point 3 of the preceding article and defined in Transitory Provision 3, shall be negotiated on the following bases:
- The average of the coefficients of population and tax burden in Catalonia, the latter being measured as the revenue from personal income tax within the territory.

- The sum equivalent to the proportional contribution due from Catalonia for those general services and burdens which the State continues to bear as its own.

- The principle of inter-territorial solidarity referred to in the Constitution, [32] which shall be applied in accordance with the inverse ratio of actual income per inhabitant in Catalonia as compared with that of the rest of Spain.

- Whatever other criteria are deemed appropriate.


[32 resp=ed] 1. The State guarantees the effective implementation of the principle of solidarity consecrated in Article 2 of the Constitution, safeguarding the establishment of a just and adequate economic balance between the different areas of Spanish territory and taking into special consideration the circumstances pertaining to those which are islands.

2. The differences between the Statutes of the different Autonomous Communities may in no case imply economic or social privileges.

2. With the object of correcting inter-territorial economic imbalances and implementing the principle of solidarity a clearing fund shall be set up for investment expenditure, the resources of which shall be distributed by the Cortes Generales amongst the Autonomous Communities and theprovinces, as the case may be.

The fixing of the new percentage share shall be subject to initial negotiation and shall come up for review at the request of the State Government or the " Generalitat " every five years.

The management, collection, settlement and inspection of its own taxes shall be incumbent on the " Generalitat " which shall have full powers to execute and organize these tasks, without prejudicing the collaboration that may be established with the State's Tax Administration System, particularly when the nature of the tax requires it.

In the case of taxes whose yields have been handed over, the " Generalitat " shall take over the management, collection, settlement and inspection of the same, by delegation from the State without prejudicing the collaboration that may be established between the two administrations, in accordance with the provisions of a law which shall determine the scope and conditions of the transfer.

The management, collection, settlement and inspection of other State taxes collected in Catalonia shall be incumbent on the State's Tax Administration System, without prejudicing the delegated powers which the " Generalitat " may receive from it and the collaboration which may be established, particularly when the nature of the tax requires it.

The " Generalitat " shall be accorded the fiscal treatment established by law for the State.

It is incumbent on the " Generalitat " to exercise financial oversight of local entities, regarding the autonomy granted to them by articles 140 and 142 of the Constitution, [33] 33 in accordance with article 9.8 of this Statute.

[33 resp=ed] The Constitution guarantees the autonomy of the municipalities which shall enjoy full legal personality.
Their government and administration shall be incumbent on their respective Town Councils, consisting of Mayors and Councillors.
The Councillors shall be elected by the residents of the municipalities by universal, equal, free and secret suffrage, in the manner laid down by the law.
The Mayors shall be elected by the Councillors or by the residents.
The law shall regulate the terms under which an open Council system shall be applicable.

Local treasuries must have sufficient funds available in order to perform the tasks assigned by law to the respective Corporations, and shall mainly be financed by their own taxation as well as by their share of State taxes and those of the Autonomous Communities.

It is the responsibility of these local entities of Catalonia to manage, collect, settle and inspect their own taxes granted to them by the law, without prejudicing their right to delegate these powers to the " Generalitat ". 

By means of a State law, a system of collaboration shall be established between these local entities, the " Generalitat " and the State for the management, collection, settlement and inspection of taxes to be determined.

The income of the local entities of Catalonia proceeding from shares in State revenue and non-conditioned subsidies shall be channelled through the " Generalitat ", which shall distribute it in accordance with the legal criteria to be established for such shares.

It is incumbent on the Executive Council or Government to draw up d enforce the budget of the " Generalitat ", and upon Parliament to examine, amend, approve and control it.
There shall be one single budget which shall include the total income and expenditure of the " Generalitat " and the agencies, institutions and companies dependent on it.

The power of the " Generalitat " to establish and levy special taxes, rates and levies, and to fix surcharges, shall be vested exclusively in Parliament. 

The " Generalitat " through a Parliamentary agreement, may issue public debt to finance investment expenditure.

The size and characteristics of such issues shall be established in accordance with the general planning of credit policy, in co-ordination with the State.

Bonds issued shall be considered Public Funds for all purposes. 

The " Generalitat " is empowered to set up institutions which will promote full employment as well as economic and social development within the framework of its jurisdiction.

The " Generalitat " in accordance with whatever State laws may stipulate, shall appoint its own representatives in the economic agencies, financial institutions and State companies whose jurisdiction includes Catalan territory and which because of their particular nature are not liable to transfer.

The " Generalitat " may set up public companies as a means of carrying out the functions assigned to it under the provisions of this Statute.

Article

The " Generalitat ", as a public authority, may make use of the powers provided for in paragraph 1) of article 130 of the Constitution, [34] and may promote co-operative societies, by means of suitable legislation, under the terms envisaged in point 21 of article 9 of this Statute. 

[34 resp=ed] 1. The public authorities shall attend to the modernization and development of all economic sectors and, in particular those of agriculture, livestock raising, fishing and handicrafts in order to bring the standard of living of all Spaniards up to the same level.

In accordance with State legislation on the subject, it may also make use of the other powers envisaged in paragraph 2 of article 129 of the Constitution [35] .

[35 resp=ed] 2. The public authorities shall efficiently promote the various forms of participation within companies and shall encourage co-operative societies by means of appropriate legislation.
They shall also establish means to facilitate access by the workers to ownership of the means of production.

Amendment of the Statute

Amendment of the Statute shall be carried out according to the following procedure:
- The right to initiate any amendment shall lie with the Executive Council or Government of the " Generalitat " the Parliament of Catalonia at the proposal of one fifth of its members, or with the " Cortes Generales ".

- The amendment proposal shall require, in all cases, the approval of the Parliament of Catalonia by a two-thirds majority, the approval of the " Cortes Generales " through an Organic Law and, finally, the positive sanction of the electorate in a referendum.


If the proposed amendment is not approved by the Parliament of Catalonia or by the " Cortes Generales " or is not sanctioned in a referendum by the electorate, it may not be referred to Parliament again for debate and voting until a year has elapsed.

The approval of the amendment by the " Cortes Generales " through an Organic Law shall include the authorization of the State for the " Generalitat " to hold the referendum referred to in paragraph b) of section 1 of this article.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the previous article, when the object of the amendment is a mere alteration of the organization of the powers of the " Generalitat " and does not affect the relations of the Self-Governing Community with the State, the following procedure may be adopted: 
- Drawing up of the proposed amendment by the Parliament of Catalonia.

- Consultation with the " Cortes Generales ".

- If, within the space of thirty days following receipt of the consultationenvisaged in the previous paragraph, the " Cortes Generales " do not declare themselves to be affected by the amendment, a duly authorized referendum shall be held on the proposed text. 

- Finally, the approval of the " Cortes Generales " shall be required through an Organic Law. 

<item > e) If, within the period established under letter c), the " Cortes " should declare themselves to be affected by the amendment, the procedure laid down in the previous article shall be adopted.
The stages mentioned in paragraph a) of point 1 of the aforementioned article shall be considered to have been completed.


Within the framework of the Constitution [36] and this Statute, the particular historical character of the internal administrative organization of the Valley of Aran shall be recognized and updated.

[36 resp=ed] 3. Groups of municipalities other than those of the provinces may be formed.

3. By grouping the bordering municipalities together, the Statutes may set up their own territorial electoral districts which will enjoy full legal personality.

Through the appropriate State law, and under its guidance, a Trust for the Archives of the Crown of Aragon shall be set up and its composition and functions regulated.
A pre-eminent part in this shall be taken by the " Generalitat " of Catalonia, other Self-Governing Communities, or provinces, as the case may be.

Until they are occupied by their regular holders, and providing the corresponding competitive examinations have been declared void vacancies existing or arising in the judicial bodies of Catalonia may be temporarily filled by staff appointed by the governing division of the High Court of Justice, applying the rules prescribed for this eventuality in the Organic Law of the Judiciary.
The temporary personnel appointed shall be dismissed when the regular holder is appointed.

When the requirements of the service make it advisable, and until a decision is taken regarding the proper increase in the number of staff in the service of the Administration of Justice, the High Court of Justice of Catalonia may fill the vacancies which are requested on a temporary basis, in accordance with the provisions of the precedingparagraph. 
For the purposes of this stipulation, personnel in the service of the Administration of Justice are considered to be any so defined in the Organic Law of the Judiciary.

Once this Statute becomes effective, the budgets drawn up and approved by the Provincial Councils (" Diputacions ") of Barcelona, Girona, Lleida and Tarragona shall be joined to that of the " Generalitat ".

Given the cultural vocation of Catalonia, the State and the " Generalitat " shall consider the promotion of culture there to be an essential duty and function, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of article 149 of the Constitution, [37] and shall therefore collaborate in their actions with the aim of fostering and developing the common cultural heritage, in its different forms and linguistic expressions. 

Within the framework of such collaboration, cultural exchanges with other Self-Governing Communities and Provinces shall be encouraged, and special attention given to all those with which Catalonia has had particular historical, cultural or commercial links.

[37 resp=ed] 2. Without prejudice to the jurisdiction which may be assumed by the Autonomous Communities, the State shall consider the promotion of culture a duty and essential functions and shall facilitate cultural communication between the Autonomous Communities, in collaboration with them.

Under the terms laid down in paragraph 3 of this provision, the yield from the following taxes shall be handed over to the " Generalitat ".
a) Net property tax.
b) Property transfer tax.
c) Gift and inheritance tax.
d) Luxury taxes levied on the consumer.

The possible suppression or modification of any of these taxes shall entail the abolition or modification of the transfer.

The content of this Provision may be modified by means of an agreement between the Government and the " Generalitat ", which shall be treated by the Government as a bill.
For these purposes, the modification of this Provision shall not be considered a modification of the Statute.

The range and conditions of the transfer shall be established by the Joint Commission referred to in paragraph 2 of Transitory Provision 3, which shall in all cases refer to yields in Catalonia. 
The Government shall treat the Commission's agreement as a bill, or, if there should be reasons of urgency, as a Decree-Law, within six months of the constitution of the first Executive Council or Government of the " Generalitat ".

The exercise of the financial powers recognized as vested in the " Generalitat " by this Statute shall be adapted to the provisions of the Organic Law referred to in paragraph 3 of article 157 of the Constitution [38] . 

[38 resp=ed] 3. The exercise of the financial powers enumerated in clause 1, above, the rules for settling the conflicts which may arise and the possible forms of financial collaboration between the Autonomous Communities and the State, may be regulated by an organic law.

The Security Council provided for in paragraph 6 of article 13 of this Statute must be set up within three months of the appointment of the first Executive Council or Government of the " Generalitat " to be constituted, in accordance with the stipulations of this Statute, so as to co-ordinate the jurisdiction of the State and the " Generalitat " in this area.

Until the " Cortes Generales " draft the laws to which this Statute refers, and the Catalan Parliament legislates on the areas under its jurisdiction, the current laws and provisions of the State relating to such matters shall remain in force, without prejudicing their being developed, where appropriate, and implemented by the " Generalitat " in those cases provided for in this Statute. 

Until such time as the transfer of the services corresponding to the powers assigned to the " Generalitat " in this Statute has been completed, the State shall guarantee the financing of such services with a sum equal to the actual cost of the service in Catalonia at the time of the transfer. 

In order to guarantee the financing of the services referred to previously, a Joint Committee of the State and the " Generalitat " shall be set up, which shall adopt a method designed to fix the percentage share provided for in paragraph 3 of article 44.
The method to be followed shall take into account both the direct and indirect cost of the services, and the investment expenditure they involve.

The Joint Commission referred to in the previous paragraph shall fix the aforesaid percentage, so long as the transitory period lasts, at least one month before the presentation of the General State Budgets to the " Cortes ".

By means of the method established in paragraph 2, a percentage shall be set which shall take into account the actual overall cost of the services transferred by the State to the " Generalitat ", less the total revenue obtained by the " Generalitat " by virtue of the transferred taxes, in relation with the total revenue obtained by the State under items 1 and 2 of the last budget prior to the transfer of the services assessed.

Until a law of Catalonia regulates the procedure for elections to Parliament, the following procedure shall be adopted:

1. After first obtaining the agreement of the Government, the Executive Council of the " Generalitat " shall call elections within a maximum period of fifteen days after the promulgation of the Statute.
The elections must be held within a maximum period of sixty days after they have been called.

2. The electoral districts shall be the four provinces of Barcelona, Girona, Lleida and Tarragona.
The Parliament of Catalonia shall consist of 135 Deputies, of whom the district of Barcelona shall elect one Deputy per 50,000 inhabitants, with a maximum of 85 Deputies.
The districts of Girona, Lleida and Tarragona shall elect a minimum of six Deputies plus one per 40,000 inhabitants, each being allocated 17, 15, and 18 Deputies, respectively.

3. The Deputies shall be elected by universal, equal, direct and secret suffrage, by adults over the age of eighteen, in accordance with a system of proportional representation. 

4. The Provincial Electoral Councils shall have, within the limits of their jurisdiction, all the powers which the current electoral rules assign to the Central Electoral Council.

The Administrative Law Division of the Territorial Court of Barcelona shall be competent to hear appeals contesting the validity of the election and the proclamation of Deputies elect, until such time as it is absorbed into the High Court of Justice of Catalonia, which shall also hear appeals or queries against the agreements of the Provincial Electoral Councils.
There shall be no appeal against the decisions of this Division of the Territorial Court.

5. In all matters not provided for in this provision, the current rules for legislative elections to the Congress of Deputies of the " Cortes Generales " shall be applicable.

Once the results of the elections have been announced, within a maximum period of eight days, the first Parliament of Catalonia shall be set up under a Presiding Council by order of seniority, consisting of a President and two Secretaries, and shall proceed immediately to elect the provisional Presiding Council.
This shall comprise a President, two Vice-Presidents and four Secretaries.

At a second sitting to be held within a maximum period of ten days from the end of the constitutive sitting, the President of Parliament (The Speaker), having consulted with the Spokesmen appointed by the various parties or political groups represented in Parliament, shall propose from among the members of Parliament a candidate for President of the " Generalitat ", a vote being taken after the debate.

The candidate must obtain an absolute majority of votes from the members of Parliament in order to be elected President of the " Generalitat ".
This election shall entail simultaneous approval of the Government's programme and of the composition of the Executive Council proposed by the elected candidate.

If this majority is not obtained, the same candidate may submit to a second ballot forty-eight hours after the previous one, when an absolute majority shall also be required for him to be elected President.
If an absolute majority is not obtained after the second ballot, the candidate may submit to a third vote forty-eight hours after the preceding one, and shall be elected President if he obtains a simple majority of the Deputies.

If, after the third ballot, the candidate is not elected, the procedure must be recommenced with a different candidate, nominated under the terms of paragraph 2 of this Transitory Provision. 

If, two months after the first ballot, no candidate has obtained the confidence of Parliament, the latter shall be dissolved, and new elections shall be called within the space of fifteen days.

Once the first President of the " Generalitat " has been elected, the latter shall be organized in accordance with the provisions of this Statute.
The President and the Councillors appointed under Royal Decree-Law 41/1977 of September 29th, shall retire from office.

The transfer of the services involved in the powers which, under this Statute, are vested in the " Generalitat " shall be effected on the following bases:

1.Once the Executive Council or Government of the " Generalitat " has been set up, within a maximum period of one month, a Joint Commission shall be set up with responsibility for drawing up an inventory of the State property and rights which are to be transferred to the " Generalitat " specifying the services and institutions to be transferred and adapting, if necessary, those which are transferred to the jurisdiction of the " Generalitat ". 

2. The Joint Commission shall consist of an equal number of members nominated by the State Government and by the Council of the " Generalitat " and shall itself decide on its procedural rules.
The resolutions of the Joint Commission shall take the form of a proposal to the State Government, which shall approve them by decree.
The resolutions shall appear as annexes to the decree, and shall be published simultaneously in the Boletín Oficial del Estado and the Diari Oficial de la Generalitat , coming into force upon publication.

3.The Joint Commission shall establish schedules and time limits for the transfer of each service.
In ali cases,theaforesaidCommission must determine, within a period of two years following the date of its constitution, that period of time by which the transfer of all the services falling under the jurisdiction of the "Generalitat', according to this Statute, is to be completed.

4.Certification by the Joint Commission of the duly promulgated government agreements shall be sufficient title for the registering of the transfer of State real estate to the " Generalitat " in the Real Estate Register.
Such certification must contain the requirements stipulated in Mortgage Law.
Change of ownership in the leases of the office premises for the services transferred shall not give the lessor the right to cancel or renew the lease.

5. Public officials attached to services under State ownership or other public institutions who are affected by the transfers to the " Generalitat " shall become subject to the latter.
All rights of any rank or kind which they possess at the time of the transfer shall be respected, including the right to take part in the transfer examinations organized by the State on equal terms with the other members of their corps, thus exercising their permanent right of choice. 

Until such time as the " Generalitat " approves the Statute of its own officials, the current provisions of the State on this subject shall be applied.

6. The " Generalitat " shall automatically and definitively assume those services, without any break in continuity, which have already been transferred to it from September 29th, 1977, until the coming into force of this Statute.
As regards those powers whose transfer is in the process of being implemented, the procedure shall be continued in accordance with the terms established by the corresponding transfer decree.
In either case, the transfers carried out shall be adapted if necessary, to the terms of this Statute.

7. The Provincial Councils (" Diputacions ") of Barcelona, Girona, Lleida and Tarragona may transfer or delegate to the " Generalitat " of Catalonia all those services which by their very nature require co-ordinated planning, in accordance with the provisions on local government legislation, or may retain for themselves the implementation and management of such services.

8. The Joint Commission set up in accordance with article 3 of the Royal Decree of September 30th, 1977, shall be considered to be dissolved when the Joint Commission referred to in paragraph 1 of this Transitory Provision is set up.

Those transfers which have to be made in educational matters in order to transfer the State's services and centres in Catalonia to the jurisdiction of the " Generalitat ", shall be carried out in accordance with the schedules and programmes laid down by the Joint Commission.

As regards television, the application of paragraph 3 of article 16 of this Statute entails the State's granting the use of a third channel on a concession basis to the " Generalitat " under State ownership, which must be set up specifically for broadcasting in the territory of Catalonia, under the terms laid down in the above-mentioned concession. 

Until this new television channel actually comes into service, Spanish Radio and Television (RAVE) shall set up, through its organization in Catalonia, a temporary programme system specifically designed for the territory of Catalonia, which Spanish Television shall broadcast over the second channel (UHF).

The cost of the specific television programming referred to in the previous paragraph shall be taken as a basis for calculation of the subsidy which may be granted to the " Generalitat " during the first two years of the operation of the new channel referred to in this Transitory Provision. 
