
THE BASIS OF IMMUNOLOGY 

Innate Immunity 

We live in a potentially hostile world filled with a bewildering array of infectious agents (figure 1.1) of diverse shape, size, composition and subversive character which would very happily use us as rich sanctuaries for propagating their'selfish genes' had we not also developed a series of defence mechanisms at least their equal in effectiveness and ingenuity (except in the case of many parasitic infections where the situation is best described as an uneasy and often unsatisfactory truce).
It is these defence mechanisms which can establish a state of immunity against infection (Latin immunitas , freedom from) and whose operation provides the basis for the delightful subject called 'Immunology'.
Aside from ill-understood constitutional factors which make one species innately susceptible and another resistant to certain infections, a number of non-specific anti-microbial systems (e.g. phagocytosis) have been recognized which are 'innate' in the sense that they are not intrinsically affected by prior contact with the infectious agent.
We shall discuss these systems and examine how, in the state of specific acquired immunity , their effectiveness can be greatly increased.

Figure 1.1

The formidable range of infectious agents which confront the immune system.

Although not norrnally classified as such because of their lack of a cell wall, the mycoplasmas are included under bacteria for convenience.
Fungi adopt many forms and approximate values for some of the smallest forms are given.

Barriers against infection 

The simplest way to avoid infection is to prevent the micro-organisms from gaining access to the body (figure 1.2).
The major line of defence is of course the skin which, when intact, is impermeable to most infectious agents; when there is skin loss, as for example in burns, infection becomes a major problem.
Additionally, most bacteria fail to survive for long on the skin because of the direct inhibitory effects of lactic acid and fatty acids in sweat and sebaceous secretions and the low pH which they generate.
An exception is Staphylococcus aureus which often infects the relatively vulnerable hair follicles and glands.

Mucus, secreted by the membranes lining the inner surfaces of the body, acts as a protective barrier to block the adherence of bacteria to epithelial cells.
Microbial and other foreign particles trapped within the adhesive mucus are removed by mechanical stratagems such as ciliary movement, coughing and sneezing.
Among other mechanical factors which help protect the epithelial surfaces, one should also include the washing action of tears, saliva and urine.
Many of the secreted body fluids contain bactericidal components, such as acid in gastric juice, spermine and zinc in semen, lacto- peroxidase in milk and Lisozyme in tears, nasal secretions and saliva.

Figure 1.2

The first lines of defence against infection: protection at the external body surfaces.

A totally different mechanism is that of microbial antagonism associated with the normal bacterial flora of the body.
These suppress the growth of many potentially pathogenic bacteria and fungi at superficial sites by competition for essential nutrients or by production of inhibitory substances.
To give one example, pathogen invasion is limited by lactic acid produced by particular species of commensal bacteria which metabolize glycogen secreted by the vaginal epithelium.
When protective commensals are disturbed by antibiotics, susceptibility to opportunistic infections by Candida and Clostridium difficile is increased.
But commensals may also produce colicins, a class of bactericidins which bind to the negatively charged surface of susceptible bacteria and insert a hydrophobic helical hairpin into the membrane; the molecule then undergoes a 'Jeckyl and Hyde' transformation to become completely hydrophobic and form a voltage-dependent channel in the membrane which kills by destroying the cell's energy potential.
Even at this level, survival is a tough game.

If micro-organisms do penetrate the body, two main defensive operations come into play, the destructive effect of soluble chemical factors such as bactericidal enzymes and the mechanism of phagocytosis-literally 'eating' by the cell.

Phagocytic cells kill micro-organismes 

'Professional' phagocytes 

The engulfment and digestion of micro-organisms is assigned to two major cell types recognized by Metchnikoff at the turn of the century as micro and macrophages .

The polymorphonuclear neutrophil 

This cell, the smaller of the two, shares a common haemopoietic stem cell precursor with the other formed elements of the blood and is the dominant white cell in the bloodstream.
It is a non-dividing short-lived cell with a multilobed nucleus and an array of granules which are virtually unstained by histological dyes such as haematoxylin and eosin, unlike those structures in the closely related eosinophil and basophil (figures 1.3 and 1.5).
The neutrophil granules are of three types: the primary azurophilic granule containing myeloperoxidase, some Lysozyme and a family of cationic proteins; the secondary 'specific' granules holding lactoferrin, Lysozyme and a B12-binding protein; and tertiary granules akin to the conventional Lysozymes with acid hydrolases.
The abundant glycogen stores can be utilized by glycolysis enabling the cells to function under anaerobic conditions.

Figure 1.3

Cells involved in innate immunity.

(a) Monocyte, showing 'horseshoe-shaped' nucleus and moderately abundant pale cytoplasm.
Note the three multilobed polymorphonuclear neutrophils and the small Lymphocyte (bottom left).
Romanowsky stain.
(b) Two monocytes stained for non-specific esterase with xxx naphthyl acetate.
Note the vacuolated cytoplasm.
The small cell with focal staining at the top is a T-lymphocyte. 
(c) Four polymorphonuclear leucocytes (neutrophils) and one eosinophil.
The multilobed nuclei and the cytoplasmic granules are clearly shown, those of the eosinophil being heavily stained. 
(d) Polymorphonuclear neutrophil showing cytoplasmic granules stained for alkaline phosphatase.
(e) Early neutrophils in bone marrow.

The primary azurophilic granules (PG) originally clustered near the nucleus, move towards the periphery where the neutrophil-specific granules are generated by the Golgi apparatus as the cell matures.
The nucleus gradually becomes lobular (LN).
Giemsa. 
(f) Inflammatory cells from the site of a brain haemorrhage showing the large active macrophage in the centre with phagocytosed red cells and prominent vacuoles.
To the right is a monocyte with horseshoe-shaped nucleus and cytoplasmic bilirubin crystals (haematoidin).
Several multilobed neutrophils are clearly delineated.
Giemsa. 
(g) Macrophages in monolayer cultures after phagocytosis of mycobacteria (stained red).
Carbol-Fuchsin counterstained with Malachite Green. 
(h) Numerous plump alveolar macrophages within air spaces in the lung. 
(i) Basophil with heavily staining granules compared with a neutrophil (below).
(j) Mast cell from bone marrow.
Round central nucleus surrounded by large darkly staining granules.
Two small red cell precursors are shown at the bottom.
Romanowsky stain. 
(k) Tissue mast cells in skin stained with Toluidine Blue.
The intracellular granules are metachromatic and stain reddish purple.
Note the clustering in relation to dermal capillaries.
The slides from which illustrations (a), (b) (d), (e), (f), (i) and (j) were reproduced and were very kindly provided by Mr M. Watts of the Dept of Haematology, Middlesex Hospital Medical School; (c) was kindly supplied by Prof.
J.J. Owen, (g) by Drs P. Lydyard and G. Rook, (h) by Dr Meryl Griffiths and (k) by Prof.
N. Woolf.

The macrophage 

These cells derive from bone marrow promonocytes which, after differentiation to blood monocytes, finally settle in the tissues as mature macrophages where they constitute the mononuclear phagocyte system (figure 1.4).
They are present throughout the connective tissue and around the basement membrane of small blood vessels and are particularly concentrated in the lung (alveolar macrophages), liver (Kupffer cells), and lining of spleen sinusoids and Lymph node medullary sinuses where they are strategically placed to filter off foreign material.
Other examples are mesangial cells in the kidney glomerulus, brain microglia and osteoclasts in bone.
Unlike the polymorphs, they are long-lived cells with significant rough-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria (figure 1.5) and whereas the polymorphs provide the major defence against pyogenic (pus-forming) bacteria, as a rough generalization it may be said that macrophages are at their best in combating those bacteria (figure 1.3g), viruses and protozoa which are capable of living within the cells of the host.

Figure 1.4

The mononuclear phagocyte system (previously included with endothelial cells and polymorphs under the term 'the reticuloendothelial system' or RES).

Promonocyte precursors in the bone marrow develop into circulating blood monocytes which eventually become distributed throughout the body as mature macrophages as shown.
The other major phagocytic cell, the polymorphonuclear neutrophil, is largely confined to the bloodstream except when recruited into sites of acute inflammation.

Phagocytosis 

Before phagocytosis can occur, the microbe must first adhere to the surface of the polymorph or macrophage, an event mediated by some rather primitive recognition mechanism likely to involve carbohydrate elements.
Depending on its nature, a particle attached to the surface membrane may initiate the ingestion phase by activating an actin - myosin contractile system which extends pseudopods around the particle (figures 1.6 and 1.7); as adjacent receptors sequentially attach to the surface of the microbe, the plasma membrane is pulled around the particle just like a 'zipper' until it is completely enclosed in a vacuole (phagosome; figures 1.6 and 1.8).
Events are now moving smartly and within one minute the cytoplasmic granules fuse with the phagosome and discharge their contents around the imprisoned micro-organism (figure 1.8) which is subject to a formidable battery of microbicidal mechanisms.

Killing 

Oxygen-dependent mechanisms 

Trouble starts for the invader from the moment phagocytosis is initiated.
There is a dramatic increase in activity of the hexose monophosphate shunt generating NADPH.
This is utilized ultimately to reduce molecular oxygen bound to a unique plasma-membrane cytochrome xxx causing a burst of oxygen consumption.
As a result, oxygen is converted to superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, singlet xxx and hydroxyl radicals, all of which are powerful microbicidal agents.
Furthermore, the combination of peroxide, myeloperoxidase and halide ions constitutes a potent halogenating system capable of killing both bacteria and viruses (table 1.1).

Oxygen-independent mechanisms 

It can also be seen from table 1.1 that the dismutation of superoxide consumes hydrogen ions and raises the pH gently so allowing the family of cationic proteins to function optimally.
Although not fully characterized yet, they damage bacterial membranes both by neutral proteinase (cathepsin G) action and by direct transfer to the microbial surface of a protein which increases bacterial permeability, cationic proteins of high molecular weight, and the so-called defensins.
Low pH, Lysozyme and lactoferrin constitute bactericidal or bacteriostatic factors which are oxygen independent and can function under anaerobic circumstances.
Finally, the killed organisms are digested by hydrolytic enzymes and the degradation products released to the exterior (figure 1.7)

Figure 1.5

Ultrastructure of phagocytic cells.

(a) Neutrophil.
The multi-lobed nucleus and cytoplasmic granules are well displayed.
(Courtesy of Dr D. McLaren.)
(b) Monocyte (x 10000) 'Horseshoe' nucleus.
Phagocytic and pinocytic vesicles, Lysosomal granules, mitochondria and isolated profiles of rough-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum are evident.

By now, the reader may be excused a little smugness as she or he shelters behind the impressive anti-microbial potential of the phagocytic cells.
But there are snags to consider; our formidable array of weaponry is useless unless the phagocyte can (i) 'home onto' the micro-organism, (ii) adhere to it, and (iii) respond by the membrane activation which initiates engulfment.
Some bacteria do produce chemical substances such as the peptide formyl met Leu phe which directionally attract leucocytes, a process known as chemotaxis; some organisms do adhere to the phagocyte surface and some do spontaneously provide the appropriate membrane initiation signal.
However, our teeming microbial adversaries are continually mutating to produce new species which may outwit the defences by doing none of these.
What then? 
The body has solved these problems with the effortless ease that comes with a few million years of evolution by developing the complement system.

Figure 1.6

Phagocytosis and killing of a bacterium.

Stage 314, respiratory burst; stage 5, damage by reactive oxygen intermediates; stage 617, damage by peroxidase, cationic proteins, Lysozyme and lactoferrin.

Figure 1.7

Adherence and phagocytosis.

(a) Phagocytosis of Candida albicans by a polymorphonuclear leucocyte (neutrophil).
Adherence to the surface initiates enclosure of the fungal particle within arms of cytoplasm.
Lysosomal granules are abundant but mitochondria are rare (x 15 000). 
(b) Phagocytosis of C. albicans by a monocyte showing near completion of phagosome formation (arrowed) around one organism and complete ingestion of two others (x 5000).
(Courtesy of Dr H. Valdimarsson.) 

Complement facilitates phagocytosis 

Complement and its activation 

Complement is the name given to a complex series of some 20 proteins which, along with blood clotting, fibrinolysis and kinin formation, forms one of the triggered enzyme systems found in plasma.
These systems characteristically produce a rapid, highly amplified response to a trigger stimulus mediated by a cascade phenomenon where the product of one reaction is the enzymic catalyst of the next.

Figure 1.8

Phagolysosome formation. 

(a) Neutrophil 30 minutes after ingestion of C. albicans.
The cytoplasm is already partly degranulated and two Lysosomal granules (arrowed) are fusing with the phagocytic vacuole.
Two lobes of the nucleus are evident (x 5000). 
(b) Higher magnification of (a) showing fusing granules discharging their contents into the phagocytic vacuole (arrowed).
(x 33 000; courtesy of Dr H. Valdimarsson).

Table 1.1

Anti-microbial systems in phagocytic vacuoles. 

Microbicidal species in bold letters, xxx , superoxide anion; xxx , singlet (activated) oxygen; xxx , hydroxyl free radical. 

Some of the complement components are designated by the letter 'C' followed by a number which is related more to the chronology of its discovery than to its position in the reaction sequence.
The most abundant and the most pivotal component is xxx which has a molecular weight of 195 kDa and is present in plasma at a concentration of around 1.2 mg/ml.

The xxx cleavage mechanism 

Under normal circumstances, an internal thiolester bond in xxx becomes activated at a very slow rate either through reaction with water or with trace amounts of a plasma proteolytic enzyme to form a reactive intermediate, either the split product xxx , or a functionally similar molecule designated xxx or xxx .
In the presence of xxx , this can complex with another complement component, factor B, which then undergoes cleavage by a normal plasma enzyme (factor D) to generate xxx .

Note that conventionally, a bar over a complex denotes enzymic activity and that on cleavage of a complement component, the larger product is generally given the suffix 'b' and the smaller 'a'.

xxx has an important new enzymic activity: it is a ' xxx convertase' which can split xxx to give xxx and xxx .

We will shortly discuss the important biological consequences of xxx cleavage in relation to microbial defences, but under normal conditions there must be some mechanism to restrain this process to a 'tick-over' level since it can also give rise to more xxx , that is, we are dealing with a potentially runaway positive-feedback circuit (figure 1.9).
As with all potentially explosive triggered cascades, there are powerful regulatory mechanisms.

The control of xxx levels 

In solution, the xxx convertase is unstable and factor B is readily displaced by another component, factor H, to form a complex which is susceptible to attack by the xxx inactivator, factor I (figure 1.10 further discussed on p. 240).
The inactivated xxx is biologically inactive and undergoes further degradation by proteases in the body fluids.

Figure 1.9

The xxx convertase loop represents an activation process.

The horizontal bar above a component designates its activation.

Activation of the xxx cleavage mechanism 

A number of micro-organisms can activate the xxx convertase to generate large amounts of xxx cleavage products by stabilizing the enzyme or their (carbohydrate) surfaces thereby protecting the' xxx from factor H.
Another protein, properdin, acts subsequently on this bound convertase to stabilize' it even further.
As xxx is split by the surface membrane-bound enzyme, it undergoes conformational change and its potentially reactive internal thiolester bond becomes exposed and binds covalently to hydroxyl or amino groups available at the microbial cell surface (figure 1.10).
Each catalytic site thereby leads to the deposition of large numbers of xxx molecules on the micro-organism.
This series of reactions leading to xxx breakdown provoked directly by microbes has been called 'the alternative pathway' of complement activation (figure 1.11).

Figure 1.10

Structural basis for the cleavage of xxx by xxx convertase and its binding to xxx or xxx groups at the cell surface through exposure of the internal thiolester bonds. 

Further cleavage leaves a smaller fragment, xxx , attached to the membrane. 
(Based essentially on Law S.K.A. '&' Reid K.B.M. (1988) Complement, figure 2.4, IRL Press, Oxford).

The post- xxx pathway 

Recruitment of a further xxx molecule into the xxx enzymic complex generates a xxx convertase which activates xxx by proteolytic cleavage releasing a small polypeptide, xxx , and leaving the large xxx fragment loosely bound to xxx .
Sequential attachment of xxx and xxx to xxx forms a complex with a transient membrane binding site and an affinity for the p-peptide chain of xxx .
The xxx chain sits in the membrane and directs the conformational changes in xxx which transform it into an amphipathic molecule capable of insertion into the lipid bilayer (cf. the colicins, p. 2) and polymerization to an annular 'membrane attack complex' (MAC; figures 1.12 and 2.3).
This forms a transmembrane channel fully permeable to electrolytes and water, and due to the high internal colloid osmotic pressure of cells, there is a net influx of xxx and water frequently leading to Lysis.

Figure 1.11

Microbial activation of the alternative complement pathway by stabilization of the xxx enzyme, and its control by factors H and I.

Although in phylogenetic terms this is the oldest pathway, it was discovered after a separate pathway to be discussed in the next chapter, and so has the confusing designation 'alternative'.

Figure 1.12

Post xxx pathway generating xxx and the xxx membrane attack complex (MAC).

(a) Cartoon of molecular assembly.
The conformational change in xxx protein structure which converts it from a hydrophilic to an amphipathic molecule (bearing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions) can be interrupted by an antibody raised against linear peptides derived from xxx ; since the antibody does not react with the soluble or membrane-boundforms of the molecule, it must be detecting an intermediate structure transiently revealed in a deep-seated structural rearrangement.
(b) Electron micrograph of a membrane xxx complex incorporated into liposomal membranes clearly showing the annular structure.
The cylindrical complex is seen from the side inserted into the membrane of the liposome on the left, and end-on in that on the right.
Although in itself a rather splendid structure, formation of the annular C9 cylinder is probably not essential for cytotoxic perturbation of the target cell membrane, since this can be achieved by insertion of amphipathic xxx molecules in numbers too few to form a clearly defined MAC.
(Courtesy of Prof. 1.
Tranum-Jensen and Dr S. Bhakdi).

Complement has a range of biological functions 

These can be grouped conveniently under three headings:

Adherence reactions 

Phagocytic cells have receptors for xxx and xxx which facilitate the adherence of xxx -coated microorganisms to the cell surface (discussed more fully on p. 205).

Figure 1.13

The mast cell.

(a) A resting cell containing many membrane-bound granules containing pre-formed mediators. 
(b) A triggered mast cell.
Note that the granules have released their contents and are morphologically altered, being larger and less electron dense.
Although most of the altered granules remain within the circumference of the cell they are open to the extracellular space.
(Electron micrographs x 5400; courtesy of Drs D. Lawson, C. Fewtrell, B. Gomperts and M Raff: from J. Exp. Med. 1975,142, 391).

Biologically active fragments 

xxx and xxx , the small peptides split from the parent molecules during complement activation, have several important actions.

Both act directly on phagocytes, especially neutrophils, to stimulate the respiratory burst associated with production of oxygen metabolites and to enhance the expression of surface receptors for xxx and xxx .
Also, both are 'anaphylatoxins' in that they are capable of triggering mediator release from mast cells (figures 1.3 and 1.13) and their circulating counterpart the basophil (figure 1.3), a phenomenon of such relevance to our present discussion that I have presented details of the mediators and their actions in figure 1.14; note in particular the chemotactic properties of these mediators and their effects on blood vessels.
In its own right, xxx is a potent neutrophil chemotactic agent and has a striking ability to act directly on the capillary endothelium to produce vasodilatation and increased permeability, an effect which seems to be prolonged by leukotriene B4 released from activated mast cells, neutrophils and macrophages.

Membrane lesions 

As described above, the insertion of the membrane attack complex into a membrane may bring about cell Lysis.
Providentially, complement is relatively inefficient at Lysing the cell membranes of the autologous host due to the presence of control proteins.

MOLECULES WHICH RECOGNIZE ANTIGEN 

The immunoglobulins 

The basic structure is a four- peptide unit 

The antibody molecule is made up of two identical heavy and two identical light chains held together by interchain disulphide bonds (figure 3.1).
These chains can be separated by reduction of the S-S bonds and acidification.
In the most abundant type of antibody, immunoglobulin G, the exposed hinge region is extended in structure due to the high proline content and is therefore vulnerable to proteolytic attack; thus the molecule is split by papain to yield two identical fragments, each with a single combining site for antigen (Fab; fragment antigen binding ), and a third fragment which lacks the ability to bind antigen and is termed Fc ( fragment crystallizable ).
Pepsin strikes at a different point and cleaves the Fc from the remainder of the molecule to leave a large 5S fragment which is formulated as xxx since it is still divalent with respect to antigen binding just like the parent antibody (figure 3.2).

Figure 3.1

Antibody model with two heavy and two light polypeptide chains held by interchain disulphide bonds.

In the diagram the amino-terminal residue (N) is on the left for each chain.

The location of the antigen combining sites was elegantly demonstrated by a study of purified antibodies to the dinitrophenyl (DNP) group mixed with the compound: xxx .

The two DNP groups are far enough apart not to interfere with each other's combination with antibody so that they can bring the antigen combining sites on two different antibodies together end to end.
When viewed by negative staining in the electron microscope, a series of geometric forms are observed which represent the different structures to be expected if a Y-shaped hinged molecule with a combining site at the end of each of the two arms of the Y were to complex with this divalent antigen.
Triangular trimers, square tetramers and pentagonal pentamers may be readily discerned (figure 3.3).
The way in which these polymeric forms arise is indicated in figure 3.4.
The position of the Fc fragment and its lack of involvement in the combination with antigen are apparent from the shape of the polymers formed using the pepsin xxx fragment (figure 3.3e).

Figure 3.2

Degradation of immunoglobulin to constituent peptide chains and to proteolytic fragments showing divalence of pepsin xxx for antigen binding and univalence of the papain Fab.

After pepsin digestion the xxx fragment representing the C-terminal half of the Fc region is formed and is held together by non-covalent bonds.
The portion of the heavy chain in the Fab fragment is given the symbol Fd. 

Amino acid sequences reveal variations in immunoglobin structure 

For good reasons, the antibody population in any given individual is just incredibly heterogeneous, and this has meant that determination of amino acid sequences was utterly useless until it proved possible to obtain the homogeneous product of a single clone.
The opportunity to do this first came from the study of myeloma proteins .

In the human disease known as multiple myeloma, one cell making one particular individual immunoglobulin divides over and over again in the uncontrolled way a cancer cell does, without regard for the overall requirement of the host.

The patient then possesses enormous numbers of identical cells derived as a clone from the original cell and they all synthesize the same immunoglobulin -the myeloma or M-protein- which appears in the serum, sometimes in very high concentrations.
By purification of the myeloma protein we can obtain a preparation of an immunoglobulin having a unique structure.
Monoclonal antibodies can also be obtained by fusing individual antibody-forming cells with a B-cell tumour to produce a constantly dividing clone of cells dedicated to making the one antibody (cf. figures 2.10 and 7.11).

The sequencing of a number of such proteins has revealed that the N-terminal portions of both heavy and light chains show considerable variability whereas the remaining parts of the chains are relatively constant, being grouped into a restricted number of structures.
It is conventional to speak of variable and constant regions of both heavy and light chains (figure 3.5).

Certain sequences in the variable regions show quite remarkable diversity and systematic analysis localizes these hypervariable sequences to three segments on the light chain (figure 3.6) and three on the heavy chain.

Figure 3.3

(a) - (d) Electron micrograph (x 1000000) of complexes formed on mixing the divalent DNP hapten with rabbit anti-DNP antibodies.

The 'negative stain' phosphotungstic acid is an electron-dense solution which penetrates in the spaces between the protein molecules.
Thus the protein stands out as a 'light' structure in the electron beam.
The hapten links together the Y-shaped antibody molecules to form (a) dimers, (b) trimers, (c) tetramers and (d) pentamers (cf.figure 3.4).
The flexibilihy of the molecule at the hinge region is evident from the variation in angle of the arms of the 'Y'.

(e) As in (b); trimers formed using the xxx antibody fragment from which the Fc structures have been digested by pepsin (x500000).
The trimers can be seen to lack the Fc projections at each corner evident in (b).
(After Valentine RC '&' Green NM, (1967), 1, mol, Biol, 27, 615; courtesy of Dr Green and with the permission of Academic Press, New York).

Figure 3.4

Three DNP antibody molecules held together as a trimer by the divalent antigen.

Compare figure 3.3b.
When the Fc fragments are first removed by pepsin, the corner pieces are no longer visible (figure 3.3e).

Figure 3.5

Amino acid sequence variability in the antibody molecule.

The terms 'V region' and 'C region' are used to designate the variable and constant regions respectively, 'Vl' and 'C' are generic terms for these regions on the light chain and 'Vh' and 'Ch' specify variable and constant regions on the heavy chain.
As stressed previously, each pair of heavy chains are identical, as are each pair of light chains.

Figure 3.6

WU and Kabat plot of amino acid variability in the variable region of immunoglobulin heavy and light chains.

The sequences of chains from a large number of myeloma monoclonal proteins are compared and variability at each position is computed as the number of different amino acids found divided by the frequency of the most common aminoacid; obviously, the higher the number the greater the variability.
The three hypervariable regions (green) in the heavy (a) and light chains (b), usually referred to as Complementarity Determining Regions (CDR), are clearly defined.
The intervening peptide sequences are termed framework regions.
(Courtesy of Prof EA Kabat).

Isotypes 

Based upon the structure of their heavy chain constant regions, immunoglobulins are classed into major groups termed classes which may be further subdivided into subclasses.
In the human, for example, there are five classes: immunoglobulin xxx .
They may be differentiated not only by their sequences but also by the antigenic structures to which these sequences give rise.

Thus, by injecting a human xxx myeloma protein into a rabbit, it is possible to raise an antiserum which can be absorbed by mixtures of myelomas of other classes to remove crossreacting antibodies and which will then be capable of reacting with xxx , but not xxx (figure 3.7).

Since all the heavy chain constant region (CH) structures which give rise to classes and subclasses are expressed together in the serum of a normal subject, they are termed isotypic variants (table 3.1).
Likewise, the light chain constant regions (CL) exist in isotypic forms known as xxx and xxx which are associated with all heavy chain isotypes.
Because the light chains in a given antibody are identical, immunoglobulins are either xxx or xxx but never mixed (unless specially engineered in the laboratory).
Thus xxx exists as xxx , and so on.

Allotypes 

This type of variation depends upon the existence of allelic forms (encoded by alleles or alternative genes at a single locus) which therefore provide genetic markers (table 3.1).
In somewhat the same way as the red cells in genetically different individuals can differ in terms of the blood group antigen system A, B, O, so the xxx heavy chains differ in the expression of their allotypic groups.
Typical allotypes are the xxx specificities on xxx which are recognizable by the ability of the individual's xxx to block agglutination of red cells coated with anti-rhesus D bearing the xxx allotype by sera from patients with rheumatoid arthritis containing the appropriate anti- xxx rheumatoid factors (figure 3.8).

Allotypic differences at a given xxx locus usually involve one or two amino acids in the peptide chain.
Take, for example, the xxx locus on xxx (table 3.1).
An individual with this allotype would have the peptide sequence: xxx on each of his xxx molecules.

Another person whose xxx was a-negative would have the sequence xxx .
xxx , i.e. two amino acids different.
To date, 25 xxx groups have been found on the xxx heavy chains and a further three (the xxx previously Inv groups) on the xxx constant region.

Allotypic markers have also been found on the immunoglobulins of rabbits and Of mice using reagents prepared by immunizing one animal with an immune complex obtained with antibodies from another animal of the same species.
As in other allelic systems, individuals may be homozygous or heterozygous for the genes encoding the markers; these are expressed co-dominantly and are inherited in simple Mendelian fashion.
Take, for example, the xxx allotypes on rabbit light chains: an animal of xxx genotype would express the xxx allotype whereas a rabbit of xxx genotype derived from xxx and xxx parents would express the xxx marker on one fraction and xxx on another fraction of its immunoglobulin molecules.

Figure 3.7

How to use monoclonal myeloma proteins to produce antibodies specific for different xxx structures.

The rabbit makes antibodies directed to different parts of the human xxx myeloma.
Antibodies to those parts which are common to other xxx classes can be absorbed out with myelomas of those classes leaving antibodies reaching with class-specific G and variable region-specific (idiotype; Id) structures on the original molecule.
By the same token, further absorption with other xxx myelomas will remove the common xxx specific antibodies leaving an antiserum directed to the idiotypic determinants alone. 
(In an attempt to simplify, I have ignored subclasses and allotypes, but the same principles can be extended to generating antisera specific for these variants.) The rabbit produces a mixture of polyclonal antibodies directed against each structural site on the antigen, i.e. they are produced by clones derived from a variety of antigen-specific parent cells which each react stereochemically in a slightly different way with the same structure (cf. p. 67).

Table 3.1

Summary of immunoglobulin variants. 

Idiotypes 

We have seen that it is possible to obtain antibodies that recognize isotypic and allotypic variants; it is also possible to raise antisera which are specific for individual antibody molecules and discriminate between one monoclonal antibody and another independently of isotypic or allotypic structures (figure 3.7).
Such antisera define the individual determinants characteristic of each antibody, collectively termed the idiotype (Kunkel & Oudin).
Not surprisingly, it turns out that the idiotypic determinants are located in the variable part of the antibody associated with the hypervariable regions (figure 3.9).

Figure 3.8

Demonstration of allotypic specificity on xxx by agglutination inhibition.

xxx red cells coated with anti-D bearing the allotype, are agglutinated by a rheumatoid arthritis serum selected for the ability of the rheumatoid factor ( xxx ; anti- xxx ) to combine with the allotype.
If the test xxx added bears the allotype in question, it will block the combining sites on xxx which will no longer be able to agglutinate the red cells.

Anti-idiotypes which react with one antibody and no other are said to recognize private idiotypes and provide further support for the idea that each antibody has a unique structure.
Frequently, antibody molecules of closely similar amino acid structure may, in addition, share idiotypes (e.g.
MI04 and Hdex2 in figure 3.9) and we then speak of public or cross-reacting idiotypes.

Anti-idiotypic sera provide useful reagents for demonstrating the same V region on different heavy chains and on different cells, for identification of specific immune complexes in patients' sera, for recognition of xxx type amyloid in subjects excreting Bence-Jones' proteins, for detection of residual monoclonal protein after therapy and perhaps for selecting lymphocytes with certain surface receptors.
The reader will (or should) be startled to learn that it is possible to raise autoanti -idiotypic sera since this means that individuals can make antibodies to their own idiotypes.
This has quite momentous consequences as will become apparent when we discuss the Jerne network theory in Chapter 8.

Immunoglobulins are folded into globular domains which subserve different functions 

Immunoglobulin domains have a characteristic structure In addition to the interchain disulphide bonds which bridge heavy and light chains, there are internal, intrachain disulphide links which form loops in the peptide chain.
As Edelman predicted, the loops a compactly folded to form globular domains (figure 3.10) which have a characteristic xxx pleated sheet protein structure.

Significantly, the hypervariable sequences appear at one end of the variable domain where they form parts of the xxx turn loops and are clustered close to each other in space.

Figure 3.9

Structural correlates of idiotypes (individual determinants on an idiotype) on antidextran antibodies.

Amino acid sequences of variable heavy chain regions of mouse monoclonal antidextran antibodies are shown.
ALL antibodies have xxx chains.

Lines indicate identity to the sequence of the first protein, J558; letters (Dayhoff code) show differences or regions correlated with idiotypes (central boxed areas).
The cross-reacting idiotype xxx is associated with second complementarity determining region ( xxx ) structures while the private idiotypes ( xxx ) are features of the xxx region in these antibodies.
The presence of the idiotypes on each antibody molecule is assessed by reaction with antisera specific for xxx (on the right).
Cross-reacting idiotypes may also be associated with the xxx region in other systems (from JM Davie et al (1986) Ann Rev Immunol 4, 147, with permission by Annual Reviews Inc).

The variable domain binds antigen 

The clustering of the hypervariable loops at the tips of the variable regions where the antigen binding site is localized (figures 3.3 and 3.4) makes them the obvious candidates to subserve the function of antigen recognition (figure 3.11) and this has be confirmed by X-ray crystallographic analysis of complexes formed between the Fab fragments of monoclonal antibodies and the* respective antigens.
The issue has been put beyond doubt by the demonstration that the antigen specificity of a mouse monoclonal antibody could be conferred on a human immunoglobulin molecule by replacing the human hypervariable sequences with those of the mouse (cf. figure 7.12).
The sequence heterogeneity of the three heavy and three light chain hypervariable loops ensures tremendous diversity in combining specificity for antigen through variation in the shape and nature of the surface they create.
Thus each hypervariable region may be looked upon as an independent structure contributing to the complementarity of the binding site for antigen and one speaks of complementarity determinants .

That these variable regions of heavy and light chains both contribute to antibody specificity is suggested by experiments in which isolated chains were examined for their antigen combining power.

In general, varying degrees of residual activity were associated with the heavy chains but relatively little with the light chains; on recombination, however, there was always a significant increase in antigen binding capacity.

Amino acids associated with the combining site can be identified by 'affinity labelling'.
In this technique, a hapten (a well-defined chemical grouping to which antibodies can be formed, e.g.

DNP in figure 3.3) is equipped with a chemically reactive side-chain which will form covalent links with adjacent amino acids after combination of the hapten with antibody, so labelling residues in the neighbourhood of the combining site.
A modification introduced by Porter and his colleagues utilizes a 'flick-knife' principle.
The hapten with an azide side-chain combines with its antibody and is then illuminated with ultraviolet light; this converts the azide to the reactive nitrene radical which will covalently link to almost any organic group with which it comes in contact (e.g. figure 3.12).
The affinity label binds to both heavy and light chains in the hypervariable regions .

Figure 3.10

In domain structure.

(a) Structure of the globular domains of a light chain (from X-ray crystallographic studies of a Bence Jones' protein by Schiffler et al (1973) Biochemistry 12, 4620).
One surface of each domain is composed essentially of four chains (grey arrows) arranged in an anti-parallel xxx pleated structure stabilized by interchain H bonds between the amide CO and NH groups running along the peptide backbone and the other surface of three such chains (green arrows); the dark bar represents the intra-chain disulphide bond.
This structure is characteristic of all immunoglobulin domains.
Of particular interest is the location of the hypervariable regions in three separate loops which are closely disposed relative to each other and form the light chain contribution to the antigen binding site (cf. figure 3.11).
One numbered residue from each complementarity determinant is identified.
To generate a Fab fragment (cf.
Left side figure 3.13c) imagine a xxx segment just like the xxx in the diagram rotate it 180ยบ around the axis of the arrow on the right of the figure and lay it on top of xxx segment (Dr A Feinstein).
(b) Schematic view of folding pattern of constant and variable light-chain domains showing the strands (A-G) and the extra sequence C' C' in the variable structure.
Lettering and colours as in (a).

Constant region domains determine secondary biological function 

The classes of antibody differ from each other in many respects: in their half-life, their distribution throughout the body, their ability to fix complement and their binding to cell surface Fc receptors.
Since the classes all have the same xxx and xxx light chains, and heavy and light variable region domains, these differences must lie in the heavy chain constant regions.

It has been possible to localize these biological activities to the various heavy chain domains by using myeloma proteins which have spontaneous domain deletions, or enzymic fragments produced by papain xxx , pepsin xxx and xxx , the C-terminal portion of xxx ) and plasmin ( xxx from rabbit xxx lacks xxx but retains the N-terminal half of xxx ).
Nowadays, of course, it can all be done by genetically engineered proteins. 
(c) End on view of the xxx strands forming the two faces of each domain.
The CDR loops come out of the plane of the paper towards the reader.
Lettering and xxx strand colours as in (a).

A model of the xxx molecule is presented in figure 3.13 which indicates the spatial disposition and interaction of the domains in xxx and ascribes the various biological functions to the relevant structures.
In principle, the V region domains form the recognition unit (cf. figure 2.1) and constant region domains mediate the secondary biological functions.

Figure 3.11

The binding site.

(a) Idealized two-dimensional representation of an antigen binding site formed by spatial apposition of peptide loops containing the hypervariable regions (hot spots) on light and heavy chains.
Numbers refer to amino acid residues.
Glycine residues are invariably present at the positions indicated whatever the specificity or Animal species of the immunoglobulin.
They are of importance in allowing peptide chains to fold back and form xxx -pleated sheet structures which enable the hypervariable regions to lie close to each other (figure 3.10).
Wu and Kabat have suggested that the flexibility of bond angle in this amino acid contributes to the effective formation of a binding site.
On this basis the greater frequency of invariant glycines on the light chain might indicate that coarse specificity for antigen binding was provided by the heavy chain and 'fine tuning' by the light chain.
Through binding to different combinations of hypervariable regions and to different residues within each of these regions, each antibody molecule can form a complex with a variety of antigenic determinants (with a comparable variety of affinities).
(b) A simulated combining site for a hapten formed by apposing the three middle fingers of each hand, each finger representing a hypervariable loop.

With protein epitopes the area of contact is usually greater and tends to involve more superficial residues (cf. figure 4.5).
There appears to be a small repertoire of main chain conformations for at least five of the six CDRs, the particular configuration adopted being determined by a few key conserved residues (Chothia C. et al (1989) Nature, 342, 877).
(Photograph by BNA Rice; inspired by A.Munro).

Figure 3.12

Affinity labelling: the hapten binds to its antibody and the azide group activated by ultraviolet light loses N2 forming a reactive radical which combines with an adjacent amino acid-in this hypothetical example an alanine residue. 

Analysis of the protein after digestion would show the alanine to be labelled with the hapten and implicate this residue in the combining site.
Studies by Fleet GWJ, Porter RR & Knowles J.R. (Nature 1969, 224, 511) indicate that the affinity label combines with heavy and light chains in a ratio of approximately 3.5:1 in their particular haptenantibody combination.

Figure 3.13

The disposition, interaction and biological properties of the xxx domains in xxx .

(a) Computer generated model of xxx .
One heavy chain is depicted in mid green, the other in light green and the light chains in grey.

Carbohydrate bound to and separating the xxx domains is in dark green.
The structure was determined by Silverton EW, Navia MA & Davies JR (1977) Proc Nat Acad Sci, 74, 5140, and the figure generated by computer graphics using RI Feldmann's system (Nat Inst Health).
(b) Diagram based on the model indicating the location of biological function and showing apposing domains making contact through hydrophobic regions (after Dr A Feinstein).
The structures of these contact frameworks are highly conserved, an essential feature if different VH and VL domains are to associate in order to generate a wide variety of antibody specificities.
These hydrophobic regions on the two complement fixing xxx ( xxx ) domains are partly masked by carbohydrate and remain independent so allowing the formation of a hinge region which is extremely flexible both with respect to variation in the angle of the Fab fragments and their rotahon about the hinge peptide chain.

Thus combining sites in xxx can be readily adapted to spatial variations in the presentation of the antigenic epitopes.
The combined xxx and xxx domains bind to Fc receptors on phagocytic cells, NK cells and placental syncytiotrophoblast; also to staphylococcal protein A. 
(Note the xxx heavy chain is designated y and the constant region domains xxx , xxx and xxx ).
(c) Relationship of Fab and Fc fragments to these domains.

THE RECOGNITION OF ANTIGEN 

Detection and Application 

After exploring the intimacy of antigen - antibody interactions at the molecular level, this chapter will be more concerned with the practical aspects of methods used to detect and exploit antigen recognition.

Precipitation 

The classical precipitin reaction 

When an antigen solution is mixed in correct proportions with a potent antiserum, a precipitate is formed.
Quantitative analysis of this interaction by the method shown in figure 5.1 gives both the antibody content of the immune serum and also an indication of the valency of the antigen, i.e. the effective number of dominant combining sites (determinants).
This can vary enormously depending on the antigen, its size, and the species making the antibody.
With hyperimmune rabbit antisera containing predominantly xxx antibodies, ovalbumin may have a valency of 10 and human thyroglobulin as many as 40 determinants on its surface.

It will be noted from the precipitin curve in figure 5.1 that as more and more antigen is added, an optimum is reached after which consistently less precipitate is formed.
At this stage the supernatant can be shown to contain soluble complexes of antigen (Ag) and antibody (Ab), many of composition xxx (figure 5.2).
In extreme antigen excess ( xxx ; figure 5.1) ultracentrifugal analysis reveals the complexes to be mainly of the form xxx , a result directly attributable to the two combining sites or divalence of the xxx antibody molecule (cf EM study, figure 3.3 and Scatchard analysis, figure 4.8).
Between these extremes the cross-linking of antigen and antibody will generally give rise to three-dimensional lattice structures, as suggested by Marrack, which coalesce, largely through xxx interaction, to form large precipitating aggregates.
Sera frequently contain up to 10% of non-precipitating antibodies which are effectively univalent because of the asymmetric presence of a sugar on one xxx region which stereochemically blocks the adjacent combining site.

Quantification by nephelometry 

The small aggregates formed when dilute solutions of antigen and antibody are mixed creates a cloudiness or turbidity which can be measured by the scattering of an incident light source (nephelometry).
Greater sensitivity can be obtained by using monochromatic light from a laser and by adding polyethylene glycol to the solution so that aggregate size is increased.
In favoured laboratories which can sport the appropriate equipment, this method is replacing single radial immunodiffusion for the estimation of immunoglobulins, xxx reactive protein; etc.

Figure 5.1

Quantitative precipitin reaction between rabbit anti-ovalbumin and ovalbumin (the classical method of Heidelberger '&' Kendall which goes back as far as 1935).

The antibodies are predominantly xxx .

Increasing amounts of ovalbumin are added to a constant volume of the antiserum placed in a number of tubes.
After incubation the precipitates formed are spun down and weighed.
Each supernatant is split into two halves: by adding antigen to one and antibody to the other, the presence of reactive antibody or antigen respectively can be demonstrated.
The antibody content of the serum can be calculated from the equivalent point where virtually no antigen or antibody is present in the supernatant.
All the antigen added is therefore complexed in the precipitate with all the antibody available and the antibody content in 0.1 ml of serum would therefore be given by xxx .

Analysis of the precipitate formed in antibody excess xxx , where the antigen-combining sites are largely saturated, gives a measure of the molar ratio of antibody to antigen in the complex and hence an estimate of the effective antigen valency.

Visualization of the precipitation reaction in gels 

Ouchterlony double diffusion 

In this method, antigen and antibody placed in wells cut in agar gel diffuse towards each other and precipitate to form an opaque line in the region where they meet in optimal proportions.
A preparation containing several antigens will give rise to multiple lines.
The immunological relationship between two antigens can be assessed by setting up the precipitation reactions in adjacent wells; the lines formed by each antigen may be completely confluent indicating immunological identity, they may show a 'spur' as in the case of partially related antigens, or they may cross, indicative of unrelated antigens (figure 5.3).
The origins of these patterns are explained in figure 5.4.
It should be emphasized that even in the case of confluent lines this can only indicate immunological identity in terms of the antiserum used, not necessarily molecular identity.
For example, purified antibodies to the dinitrobenzene hapten would give a line of confluence when set up against dinitrophenyl (DNP)- ovalbumin and DNP- serum albumin conjugates placed in adjacent wells.

Where reagents are present in balanced proportions, the line formed will generally be concave to the well containing the reactant of higher molecular weight, be it antigen or antibody.
This is a consequence of the usually slower diffusion rate of larger sized molecules.

The gel precipitation method can be made more sensitive by incorporating the antiserum in agar and allowing the antigen to diffuse into it (Feinberg).
This method of single radial immunodiffusion is used for the quantitative estimation of antigens.

Single radial immunodiffusion (SRID) 

When antigen diffuses from a well into agar containing suitably diluted antiserum, initially it is present in a relatively high concentration and forms soluble complexes; as the antigen diffuses further the concentration continuously falls until the point is reached at which the reactants are nearer optimal proportions and a ring of precipitate is formed.
The higher the concentration of antigen, the greater the diameter of this ring (figure 5.5).
By incorporating, say, three standards of known antigen concentration in the plate, a calibration curve can be obtained and used to determine the amount of antigen in the unknown samples tested (figure 5.6).
The method is used routinely in clinical immunology, particularly for immunoglobulin determinations, and also for substances such as the third component of complement, transferrin, C-reactive protein and the embryonic protein, xxx fetoprotein, which is associated with certain liver tumours.

Figure 5.2

Diagrammatic representation of complexes formed between a hypothetical tetravalent antigen and bivalent antibody mixed in different proportions.

In practice, the antigen valencies are unlikely to lie in the same plane or to be formed by identical determinants as suggested in the figure.
(a) In extreme antibody excess, the antigen valencies are saturated and the molar ratio xxx approximates to the valency of the antigen. 
(b) At equivalence, large lattices are formed which aggregate to form a typical immune precipitate.
This secondary aggregation, and hence precipitation tends to be inhibited by high salt concentration. 
(c) In extreme antigen excess where the two valencies of each antibody molecule become rapidly saturated, the complex xxx tends to predominate.
(d) A monovalent hapten binds but is unable to cross-link antibody molecules.

Figure 5.3

Multiple lines formed in the Ouchterlony test (double-diffusion precipitation) when rabbit antiserum (centre well) reacts in agar gel with four different antigen preparations (peripheral wells).

Non-identity and partial identity of antigens are shown respectively by crossing over and spur formation between precipitin lines.

Figure 5.4

(a) Line of confluence obtained with two antigens which cannot be distinguished by the antiserum used.

(b) Spur formation by partially related antigens having a common determinant x but individual determinants y and z reacting with a mixture of antibodies directed against x and y.
The antigen with determinants x and z can only precipitate antibodies directed to x.
The remaining antibodies ( xxx ) cross the precipitin line to react with the antigen from the adjacent well which has determinant y giving rise to a 'spur' over the precipitin line. 
(c) Crossing over of lines formed with unrelated antigens.

Figure 5.5

Single radial immunodiffusion: relation of antigen concentration to size of precipitation ring formed.

Antigen at the higher concentration diffuses further from the well before it falls to the level giving precipitation with antibody near optimal proportions.

Figure 5.6

Measurement of xxx concentration in serum by single radial immunodiffusion.

The diameter of the standards enables a calibration curve to be drawn and the concentration of xxx in the sera under test can be read off:TI- serum from patient with xxx myeloma; 15 mg/ml, T2- serum from patient with hypogammaglobulinaemia; 2.6 mg/ml, T3- normal serum; 9.6 mglml.
(Courtesy of Dr FC Hay).

Figure 5.7

The principle of immunoelectrophoresis.

Stage 1: Electrophoresis of antigen in agar gel.
Antigen migrates to hypothetical position shown.
Stage 2: Current stopped.
Trough cut in agar and filled with antibody.

Precipitin arc formed.
Because antigen theoretically at a point source diffuses radially and antibody from the trough diffuses with a plane front, they meet in optimal proportions for precipitation along an arc.
The arc is closest to the trough at the point where antigen is in highest concentration.

Figure 5.8

Major human immunoglobulin classes demonstrated by immunoelectrophoretic analysis of human serum using a rabbit antiserum in the trough.

The position of the main electrophoretic globulin fractions is indicated.
Three of the five major immunoglobulin classes can be recognised: immunoglobulin G xxx , immunoglobulin A ( xxx ) and immunoglobulin M xxx .
The xxx precipitin arc extends from the y region well into the xxx globulin mobility range reflecting the tremendous heterogeneity of the antibody population with respect to amino acid composition and net charge.

Immunoelectrophoresis 

The principle of this is described in figure 5.7.

The method is of value for the identification of antigens by their electrophoretic mobility, particularly when other antigens are also present.
In clinical immunology, semi-quantitative information regarding immunoglobulin concentrations and identification of myeloma proteins is provided by this technique Figure 5.8).

There have been some felicitous developments of the principle combining electrophoresis with immunoprecipitation in which movement in an electric field drives the antigen directly into contact with antibody. 
Countercurrent immunoelectrophoresis may be applied to antigens which migrate towards the positive pole in agar (see figure 5.9).
This qualitative technique is much faster and considerably more sensitive than double diffusion (Ouchterlony) and is used for the detection of hepatitis B antigen or antibody, DNA antibodies in SLE (p. 307), autoantibodies to soluble nuclear antigens in mixed connective tissue disease, and Aspergillus precipitins in cases with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. 
Rocket electrophoresis is a quantitative method which involves electrophoresis of antigen into a gel containing antibody.
The precipitation arc has the appearance of a rocket, the length of which is related to antigen concentration (figure 5.10).
Like countercurrent electrophoresis this is a rapid method but again the antigen must move to the positive pole on electrophoresis; it is therefore suitable for proteins such as albumin, transferrin and caeruloplasmin but immunoglobulins are more conveniently quantitated by single radial immunodiffusion.
One powerful variant of the rocket system, Laurell's two-dimensional or crossed immunoelectrophoresis , involves a preliminary electrophoretic separation of an antigen mixture in a direction perpendicular to that of the final 'rocketstage' (figure 5.11).
In this way one can quantitate each of several antigens in a mixture.
One straight forward example is the estimation of the degree of conversion of the third component of complement (C3) to the inactive form C3c (cf. figure 1.10) which may occur in the serum of patients with active SLE or the synovial fluid of affected joints in active rheumatoid arthritis, to give but two examples (figure 5.11b).
The remarkable ability of the technique to resolve a highly complex mixture of antigens is clearly seen in figure 5.11c.

Figure 5.9

Countercurrent immunoelectrophoresis.

Antibody moves 'backwards' in the gel on electrophoresis due to endosmosis; an antigen which is negatively charged at the pH employed will move towards the positive pole and precipitate on contact with antibody.

Figure 5.10

Rocket electrophoresis.

Antigen, in this case human serum albumin, is electrophoresed into gel containing antibody.
The distance from the starting well to the front of the rocket-shaped arc is related to antigen concentration.
In the example shown, human serum albumin is present at relative concentrations from left to right: 3, 2 and 1.
(Reproduced from Weir et al (eds) (1986) Handbook of Experimental Immunology 1, figure 32.42, with permission).

Indirect precipitation of complexes 

For a variety of reasons, addition of antibody to an antigen may give rise to a soluble complex.
If one wishes to analyse the complex for its antibody content or to identify the antigens within it, the complex can be brought out of solution either by changing its solubility or by adding an anti-immunoglobulin precipitating reagent as in figure 5.12.
An example of how this technique was used to characterize the main chain of human class I MHC molecules is given in figure 5.13.

Figure 5.11

Crossed immunoelectrophoresis.

(a) Antigens are separated on the basis of electrophoretic mobility in agar.
A strip (doffed) containing the separated antigens is cut out as shown, laid over another gel which contains antiserum, and electrophoresis carried out in a direction at right angles to the first to drive the antigens through the antiserum to form precipitin peaks; the area under the peak is related to the concentration of antigen.
(b) Actual run showing C3 conversion xxx in serum (stained gel).
In this case the arcs interact because of common antigenic determinants.
(Courtesy of D C Levity) (c) 'Himalayan fantasy' showing a highly complex mixture of antigens from Mycobacterium intracellulare.
(Reproduced from Weir et al (eds) (1986) Handbook of Experimental Immunology 1, figure 32.44, with permission).

Figure 5.12

Precipitation of soluble complexes either (i) by changing the solubility so that the complexes are precipitated while the uncombined Ag and Ab remain in solution, or (ii) by adding a precipitating antiimmunoglobulin antibody or staphylococcal organisms which bind immunoglobulin Fc to the protein A on their surface and can then be spun down. 

Figure 5.13

Analysis of membrane-bound class I MHC antigens (cf p 51)

The membranes from human cells pulsed with xxx methionine were solubilized in a detergent, mixed with a monoclonal antibody to xxx and B molecules and immunoprecipitated with staphylococci.
An autoradiograph (A) of the precipitate run in SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis shows the HLA-A and B chains as a 43 000 molecular weight doublet (the position of a 45 000 marker is arrowed).
If membrane vesicles were first digested with Proteinase K before solubilization, a labelled band of molecular weight 39000 can be detected (B) consistent with a transmembrane orientation of the HLA chain: the 4000 hydrophilic C-terminal fragment extends into the cytoplasm and the major portion, recognized by the monoclonal antibody and by tissue typing reagents, is present on the cell surface (cf. figure 3.18). 
(From data and autoradiographs kindly supplied by D MJ Owen).

Agglutination by antibody 

Whereas the cross-linking of multivalent protein antigens by antibody leads to precipitation, crosslinking of cells or large particles by antibody directed against surface antigens leads to agglutination.
Since most cells are electrically charged, a reasonable number of antibody links between two cells is required before the mutual repulsion is overcome.
Thus agglutination of cells bearing only a small number of determinants may be difficult to achieve unless special methods such as further treatment with an antiglobulin reagent are used.

Similarly, the higher avidity of multivalent xxx antibody relative to xxx (cf. p. 73) makes the former more effective as an agglutinating agent, molecule for molecule (figure 5.14).

Figure 5.14

Mechanism of agglutination of antigen-coated particles by antibody cross-linking to form large macroscopic aggregates.

If red cells are used, several cross-links are needed to overcome the electrical charge at the cell surface.
xxx is superior to xxx as an agglutinator because of its multivalent binding and because the charged cells are further apart.

Agglutination reactions are used to identify bacteria and to type red cells; they have been observed with leucocytes and platelets and even with spermatozoa in certain cases of male infertility due to sperm agglutinins.
Because of its sensitivity and convenience, the test has been extended to the identification of antibodies to soluble antigens which have been artificially coated on to various types of particle.
Red cells have been popular and they can be coated with proteins after first modifying their surface with tannic acid or chromium chloride, or by direct use of bifunctional cross linking agents such as bisdiazobenzidine.
The large, rapidly sedimenting red cells of the turkey are finding increasing favour for this purpose.
The tests are usually carried out in the wells of plastic agglutination trays where the settling pattern of the cells on the bottom of the cup may be observed (figure 5.15); this provides a more sensitive indicator than macroscopic clumping.
Inert particles such as bentonite and polystyrene latex have also been coated with antigens for agglutination reactions, particularly those used to detect the rheumatoid factors (figure 5.16).

Purification of antigens and antibodies by affinity chromatography 

The principle is simple and very widely applied.

Antigen or antibody is bound through its free amino groups to cyanogen-bromide-activated Sepharose particles.
Insolubilized antibody, for example, can be used to pull the corresponding antigen out of solution in which it is present as one component of a complex mixture, by absorption to its surface.
The uninteresting garbage is washed away and the required ligand released from the affinity absorbent by disruption of the antigen-antibody bonds by changing the pH or adding chaotropic ions such as thiocyanate (figure 5.17).

Likewise, an antigen immunosorbent can be used to absorb out an anti body from a mixture whence it can be purified by elution.
The potentially damaging effect of the eluting agent can be avoided by running the anti serum down an affinity column so prepared as to have relatively weak binding for the antibody being purified; under these circumstances, the antibody is retarded in flow rate rather than being firmly bound.
If a protein mixture is separated by iso electric focusing into discrete bands, an individual band can be used to affinity purify specific antibodies from a polyclonal antiserum; quite useful when supplies of antigen are painfully limited.

Figure 5.15

Tanned red cell haemagglutination test for thyroglobulin autoantibodies.

Thyroglobulin-coated cells were added to dilutions of patients' sera.
Uncoated cells were added to a 1:10 dilution of serum as a control.
In a positive reaction, the cells settle as a carpet over the bottom of the cup.

Because of the 'V'-shaped cross-section of these Cups, in negative reactions the cells fall into the base of the 'V' forming a small easily recognizable button.
The reciprocal of the highest serum dilation giving an unequivocally positive reaction is termed the titre.
The titres reading from left to right are: xxx .
The control for serum No. 46 was slightly positive and this serum should be tested again after absorption with uncoated cells.

Figure 5.16

Macroscopic agglutination of latex coated with human xxx by serum from a patient with rheumatoid arthritis.

This contains rheumatoid factor, an autoantibody directed against determinants on xxx . 
(a) Normal serum, (b) patient's serum.

Figure 5.17

Affinity chromatography.

A column is filled with Sepharose-linked antibody.
The antigen mixture is poured down the column.
Only the antigen binds and is released by change in pH for example.
An antigen-linked affinity column will purify antibody obviously.

THE ACQUIRED IMMUNE RESPONSE 

Production of Effectors 

The synthesis of humoral antibody 

Detection and enumeration of antibody-forming cells 

Immunofluorescence 

Cells containing antibody within their cytoplasm can be identified by the 'sandwich' technique (see figure 5.24).
For example, a cell making antibodies to tetanus toxoid if treated first with the antigen will subsequently bind a fluorescein-labelled antitetanus antibody and can then be visualized in the fluorescence microscope.

Plaque techniques 

Antibody-secreting cells can be counted by diluting them in an environment in which the antibody formed by each individual cell produces a readily observable effect.
In one of the most widely used techniques, developed from the original method of Jerne and Nordin, the cells from an animal immunized with sheep erythrocytes are suspended together with an excess of sheep red cells and complement within a shallow chamber formed between two microscope sides.
On incubation the antibody-forming cells release their immunoglobulin which coats the surrounding erythrocytes.
The complement will then cause lysis of the coated cells and a plaque clear of red cells will be seen around each antibody-forming cell (figure 7.1).
Direct plaques obtained in this way largely reveal xxx producers since this antibody has a high haemolytic efficiency.
To demonstrate xxx synthesizing cells it is necessary to increase the complement binding of the erythrocyte, antibody complex by adding a rabbit anti- xxx serum; thus develops the 'indirect plaques' and can be used to enumerate cells making antibodies in different immunoglobulin subclasses, provided the appropriate rabbit antisera are available.
The method can be extended by coating an antigen such as pneumococcus polysaccharide on to the red cell, or by coupling hapten groups to the erythrocyte surface.

In the 'Elispot' modification, the antibody-forming cell suspension is incubated on a dish of immobilized antigen.
The secreted antibody is captured locally and is visualized after removal of the cells, by treatment with peroxidase-labelled anti- xxx , and development of the colour reaction by incorporating the substrate in a gel which is poured over the floor of the dish.
Limited diffusion of the coloured reaction product in the gel provides a series of macroscopic spots which can be readily enumerated (figure 7.2).

Protein synthesis 

In the normal antibody-forming cell there is a rapid turnover of light chains which are present in slight excess.
Defective control occurs in many myeloma cells and one may see excessive production of light chains or complete suppression of heavy chain synthesis.
Interchain disulphide bridges may form while the heavy chains are still attached to the ribosomes (figure 7.3) but the sequence in which the intermediates arise varies with the nature of the immunoglobulin.
Using 'pulse and chase' techniques with radioactive amino acids it was found that the build-up of both light and heavy chains proceeds continuously starting from the N-terminal end.
Furthermore, isolation of the mRNA for each type of chain has shown them to be of appropriate size to allow synthesis of the complete peptides.
The evidence therefore confirms the present view that the messenger regions for variable and constant regions are spliced together before leaving the nucleus.

Differential splicing mechanisms also provide a rational explanation for the co-expression of surface xxx and xxx with identical V regions on a single cell (figure 7.4), and for the switch from production of membrane-bound xxx receptor to secretory xxx in the antibody-forming cell (figure 7.5).

Figure 7.1

Jerne plaque technique for enumerating antibody-forming cells (Cunningham modification). 

(a) The direct technique for cells synthesizing xxx haemolysin is shown.
The indirect technique for visualizing cells producing xxx haemolysins requires the addition of anti- xxx to the system.

The difference between the plaques obtained by direct and indirect methods gives the number of xxx plaques.
The reverse plaque assay enumerates total xxx producing cells by capturing secreted xxx on red cells coated with anti xxx .

Multiple plaque assays can be carried out by a modification using microtitre plates.
(b) Photograph of plaques which show as circular dark areas (some of which are arrowed) under dark-ground illumination.
They vary in size depending upon the antibody affinity and the rate of secretion by the antibody-forming cell.
(Courtesy of Mr C Shapland Ms P. Hutchings '&' Dr D Male).

Class switching occurs in individual B-cells 

The synthesis of antibodies belonging to the various immunoglobulin classes proceeds at different rates.
Usually there is an early xxx response which tends to fall off rapidly.
xxx antibody synthesis builds up to its maximum over a longer time period.
On secondary challenge with antigen, the time course of the xxx response resembles that seen in the primary.
By contrast, the synthesis of xxx antibodies rapidly accelerates to a much higher titre and there is a relatively slow fall-off in serum antibody levels (figure 7.6).
The same probably holds for xxx and in a sense both these immunoglobulin classes provide the main immediate defence against future penetration by foreign antigens.

Figure 7.2

'Elispot' (from ELISA technique) system for enumerating antibody-forming cells.

The picture shows spots formed by hybridoma cells making autoantibodies to thyroglobulin revealed by alkaline phosphatase-linked anti xxx (courtesy of P. Hutchings).
Increasing numbers of hybridoma cells were added to the top two and bottom left hand wells which show corresponding increases in the number of 'Elispots', The bottom right-hand well is a control using a hybridoma of irrelevant specificity.

There is evidence that individual cells can switch over from xxx to xxx production.

Several days after immunization with salmonella flagella, isolated cells taken into micro-drop cultures were shown to produce both xxx and xxx immobilizing antibodies.
In another study it was shown that antigen challenge of irradiated recipients receiving relatively small numbers of Lymphoid cells, produced splenic foci of cells, each synthesizing antibodies of different heavy chain class bearing a single idiotype; the common idiotype suggests that each focus is derived from a single precursor cell whose progeny can form antibodies of different class.

Antibody synthesis in most classes shows considerable dependence upon T-cooperation in that the responses in T-deprived animals are strikingly deficient; such is true of mouse xxx and part of the xxx antibody responses.
Independent antigens such as the polyclonal activator, LPS endotoxin, induce synthesis of xxx with some xxx .

Immunopotentiation by complete Freund's adjuvant, a water-in-oil emulsion containing antigen in the aqueous phase and a suspension of killed tubercle bacilli in the oily phase (p. 238), seems to occur, at least in part, through the activation of helper T-cells which stimulate antibody production in T-dependent classes.
The prediction from this that the response to T-independent antigens (e.g. pneumococcus polysaccharide, p. 120) should not be potentiated by Freund's adjuvant is borne out in practice; furthermore, as mentioned previously, these antigens evoke primarily xxx antibodies and poorly defined immunological memory as do T-dependent antigens injected into T-cell deficient neonatally thymectomized hosts.

Thus, in rodents at least, the switch from xxx to xxx and other classes appears to be largely under T-cell control presumably mediated by soluble factors as suggested earlier (p. 125), although it is often difficult to establish whether a given agent is itself causing the switch or is a particularly good growth promoter for the xxx class resulting from the switch.
Let us take another look at the stimulation of small surface xxx positive B-cells by LPS; as we noted, on its own the non-specific mitogen evokes the synthesis of xxx .
Following addition of interleukin-4 (IL-4) to the system, there is heightened production of xxx and xxx whereas interferon-Y (IFNY) stimulates xxx secretion at concentrations that inhibit the effects of IL-4.
IL-5 promotes maturation without affecting xxx class.

The notion that IL-4 was a switch factor for xxx stemmed largely from results with a given Lymphoma but with no confirmatory data using normal B-cells.
Rather more convincing was the 5 -10-fold increase in xxx production when transforming growth factor-p ( xxx ) was introduced into the LPS system and the demonstration of a switch from surface xxx negative to positive in Peyer's patch cells so treated.

Significantly, xxx induced the formation of sterile transcripts consisting of a 5' exon derived from germline sequences upstream of the switch region (cf figure 7.7) spliced to the xxx class xxx gene.
The 5' exons contain stop codons in the open reading frame of the xxx gene and so cannot encode large proteins.
This is now seen to be one instance of a more general phenomenon in which sterile transcripts of a xxx gene are associated with a switch to that class (figure 7.7).
Perhaps the transcripts facilitate the action of the recombinase in some way or maybe they reflect an increased accessibility of that particular switch region to the enzyme.
Under the influence of the recombinase, a given VDJ gene segment is transferred from xxx to an alternative constant region gene by utilizing the specialized switch region sequences (figure 7.7), so yielding antibodies of the same specificity but of different class.

Figure 7.3

Synthesis of mouse xxx immunoglobulin.

As the H-chains near completion adjacent peptide chains can spontaneously cross-link through their constant regions.
It is thought that the light chains may aid release of the terminal chains from the ribosome by forming the xxx molecule.
Combination with a further light chain would yield the full immunoglobulin xxx (based on Askonas BA '&' Williamson AR (1986) Biochem I 109, 637).
The order in which the interchain disulphide bridges are formed varies in different immunoglobulins depending on the relative strengths of the bonds as assessed by susceptibility to reduction Surface receptor xxx would be inserted by its hydrophobic sequences into the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum as it was synthesized.

Figure 7.4

Surface membrane xxx and xxx receptors of identical specificity appear on the same cell through differential splicing of the composite primary RNA transcript.

For simplicity the leader sequence has been omitted.

Figure 7.5

Splicing mechanism for the switch from the membrane to the secreted form of xxx .

The hydrophobic sequence encoded by the exons M-M which anchors the receptor xxx to the membrane is spliced out in the secreted form (leader sequences again omitted for simplicity).

Figure 7.7

Class-switching to produce antibodies of identical specificity but different immunoglobulin isotype (in this example from xxx to xxx ) is achieved by a recombinase process which utilizes the specialized switch sequences and leads to a loss of the intervening DNA loop xxx . 

The role of the CH transcript which always accompanies the phenomenon is not yet established.
Rare examples of mutant clones Expressing an isotypic gene 5' of the parent heavy chain gene suggest that switching to constant region genes on the sister chromatid may sometimes occur.

Is the specificity of antibody secreted by the progeny the same as that of the surface immunogloblin of the clonal parent? 

The answer is, often yes, often partially and sometimes no.
You may think this a trifle cryptic so let's recapitulate.
The clonal selection hypothesis predicts an affirmative answer to our question because it postulates that each lymphocyte is programmed to make only one antibody, that it puts the antibody as a receptor on its surface so that antigen will bind to it, and that as a result the cell is selectively triggered for antibody formation; as it only knows how to make one antibody, the specificity should be identical with the original surface receptor.

The one-cell one- antibody idea does seem OK 

With immunofluorescent techniques, individual immunoglobulin cells can be stained for either K or A chains but not both, and in the heterozygous rabbit, for the maternal allotypic marker or the paternal but never both together ( allelic exclusion ).

Furthermore, plasma cell tumours only produce one, and a lot more than one, myeloma protein.
Similar restrictions apply to the staining of surface xxx on B-lymphocytes.

That these surface immunoglobulins can behave as antibodies is suggested by the ability of a small percentage of lymphocytes to bind specific antigens such as sheep cells (forming 'rosettes') or radioactive salmonella flagellin.
This binding can be blocked by anti-immunoglobulin sera.
Humphrey has further shown that the percentage of cells binding antigen is increased in primed and decreased in tolerant animals.

When a soluble antigen like polymerized flagellin binds to a specific cell it causes patching and capping of the surface xxx in just the same way as an anti- xxx serum (cf p. 21).
If the antigen-capped cells are now stained with fluorescent anti xxx , all the xxx is found in the cap, there being none on the remainder of the lymphocyte surface, when antigen reacts with a cell, all the xxx molecules on the cell surface combine with the antigen showing that they have similar specificity.
Exactly the same result is seen if an antiidiotype is used for capping, i.e. all the surface xxx molecules on a given cell have the same idiotype.
So far so good.

The surface antibody does appear to be related to the specificity of the secreted immunoglobulin 

If the production of a given antibody depends upon its representation as a surface xxx in the pool of antigen-sensitive B-cells, then positive or negative selection for cells of that specificity prior to antigen challenge should have profound effects on subsequent reactivity.
Indeed that is just what happens.
Depletion of antigen-specific cells by reaction with their surface receptors abrogates the further ability of that population to respond to antigen (figure 7.,8).
Likewise, a high percentage of cells isolated by virtue of their specific binding to a hapten like DNP, secrete anti-DNP when stimulated under kindly conditions in vitro .
If more is wanted, then it can be shown rather cleverly that surface and cytoplasmic xxx in secreting cells share a common idiotype.
First stain the surface xxx of the living cells at 4ยบ C with fluorescein-labelled anti-idiotype and then fix with glutaraldehyde and stain the cytoplasm of the cytocentrifuged cells with anti-idiotype conjugated with rhodamine.
Double staining proves the point.
Well now, why could the initial question not be answered unequivocally in the affirmative?
The answer lies in somatic mutation.

Figure 7.8

Depletion of cells with surface receptors for antigen removes subsequent ability to respond to that antigen.

(a) Primed cells (green) depleted by reaction between surface xxx on the Lymphocytes and insolubilized antigen packing the column.
Further control, ovalbumin-coated beads. 
(b) Primed cells (green) destroyed by radiation 'suicide' through binding highly radioactive antigen to surface xxx .

Further control, unlabelled antigen (TGAL).
BSA = bovine serum albumin; Ova = ovalbumin; TGAL = poly-lysine with poly-alanine side-chains randomly tipped with tyrosine and glutamine.

Class-switched B-cells are subject to high mutation rates after the initial response 

The reader will no doubt recollect that this idea was raised in Chapter 3 when discussing the generation of diversity.
The normal V region mutation rate is of the order of 10 5/base pair/cell division but this rises to 10 3/base pair/generation in B-cells as a result of antigenic stimulation.
This process is illustrated well in figure 7.9 which charts the accumulation of somatic mutations in the immunodominant VH/VK antibody structure during the immune response to phenyloxazolone.
With time and successive boosting the mutation rate is seen to rise dramatically, and in the context of the present discussion it is clear that mutations occurring within or adjacent to the complementarity determining hypervariable loops can give rise to cells which secrete antibodies having a different combining affinity to that of the original parent cell.
Randomly, some mutated daughter cells will have higher affinity for antigen, some the same or lower and others perhaps none at all.
Similarly, mutations in the framework regions may be 'silent' or, if they perturb the ability of the molecule to fold properly, give rise to non-functional molecules.

Pertinently, the proportions of germinal centre B-cells with 'silent' mutations is high early in the immune response but falls dramatically with time suggesting that early diversification is followed by preferential expansion of clones expressing mutations which improve their chances of reacting with and being stimulated by antigen.

Antibody affinity 

The effect of antigen dose 

Other things being equal, the binding strength of an antigen for the surface antibody receptor of a B-cell will be determined by the usual affinity constant of the reaction: xxx and the reactants will behave according to the Law of Mass Action (cf. p. 71).

Figure 7.9

Increasing somatic mutations in the immunodominant germ line antibody observed in hybridomas isolated following repeated immunization with phenyl- oxazolone. 

(Data from Berek C '&' Apel M (1989) Progress in Immunol, vii, 99, Melchers F et al (eds).
Springer Verlag, Berlin).

It may be supposed that when an appropriate number of antigen molecules are bound to the antibody receptors on the cell surface, the Lymphocyte will be stimulated to develop into an antibody-producing clone.

When only small amounts of antigen are present, only those Lymphocytes with high-affinity antibody receptors will be able to bind sufficient antigen for stimulation to occur and their daughter cells will, of course, also produce high affinity antibody.
Consideration of the antigen-antibody equilibrium equation will show that, as the concentration of antigen is increased, even antibodies with relatively low affinity will bind more antigen; therefore at high doses of antigen the Lymphocytes with lower-affinity antibody receptors will also be stimulated and, as may be seen from figure 7.10, these are more abundant than those with receptors of high affinity.
Furthermore, there is a strong possibility that cells with the highest affinity will bind so much antigen, as to become tolerized (cf. p. 187).
Thus, in summary, low amounts of antigen produce high-affinity antibodies, whereas high antigen concentrations give rise to an anti-serum with low to moderate affinity.

Figure 7.10

Relationship of antigen concentration to affinity of antibodies produced.

Low concentrations of antigen xxx bind to and stimulate a range of high affinity memory cells and the resulting antibodies are of high affinity.
High doses of antigen xxx are able to bind sufficiently to the low affinity cells and to stimulate them, whilst the highest affinity cells may bind an excess of antigen and be tolerized; the resulting antiserum will have a population of low to moderate affinity antibodies.

Maturation of affinity 

In addition to being brisker and fatter, secondary responses tend to be of higher affinity, which from our point of view is a particularly felicitous state of affairs.
There are probably two main reasons for this maturation of affinity after primary stimulation.
First, once the primary response gets under way and the antigen concentration declines to low levels, only successively higher affinity cells will bind sufficient antigen to maintain proliferation.
Second, at this stage the cells are mutating madly in the germinal centres and any mutants with an adventitiously higher affinity will bind well to antigen on follicular dendritic cells and be positively selected for by its persistent clonal expansion.
The increase in somatic mutation which occurs pari passu with the maturation of affinity accords well with this analysis and argues against the view that high affinity clones arise without mutation from very small numbers of precursors in the preimmune population.
Modification of antibody specificity by point mutations allows gradual diversification on which positive selection for affinity can act during clonal expansion; on the other hand, other mechanisms such as gene conversion which produce gross changes are more likely to destroy the antigen binding structure.

It is worth noting that responses to thymus-independent antigens which have poorly developed memory with very rare mutations do not show this phenomenon of affinity maturation.
Overall, the ability of T-cell helpers to facilitate responses to non-polymeric, non-polyclonally activating antigens, to induce expansive clonal proliferation, to effect class switching and, lastly, to fine-tune responses to higher affinity has provided us with bigger, better and more flexible immune responses.

THE ACQUIRED IMMUNE RESPONSE 

Development 

T-Cell development 

The multipotential haemopoietic stem cell gives rise to the formed elements of the blood 

Haemopoiesis originates in the early yolk sac but as embryogenesis proceeds, this function is taken over by the fetal liver and finally by the bone marrow where it continues throughout life.
The haemopoietic stem cell which gives rise to the formed elements of the blood (figure 9.1) can be shown to be multipotent, to seed other organs and to renew itself through the creation of further stem cells.
Thus an animal can be completely protected against the lethal effects of high doses of irradiation by injection of bone marrow cells which will repopulate its Lymphoid and myeloid systems.
The stem cells differentiate within the micro-environment of sessile stromal cells which produce various growth factors such as xxx and so on.
The importance of this interaction between undifferentiated stem cells and the micro-environment which guides their differentiation is clearly shown by studies on mice homozygous for mutations at the W or the Sl loci which, amongst other defects, have severe macrocytic anaemia.
W/W lack myeloid progenitors and can be restored by injection of normal bone marrow stem cells, whereas Si/SI, which have normal stem cells but a defective stromal micro-environment, can be corrected by transplantation of a normal spleen fragment (figure 9.2).

We have come a long way towards the goal of isolating highly purified populations of haematopoietic stem cells.
In the mouse, the most likely candidate is the cell with the following surface phenotype: high expression of MHC, low positivity for xxx , clearly positive for xxx (recognized by a monoclonal antibody reacting with stem cells) and for the adhesion molecule xxx , and negative for xxx (markers for B-cells, macrophages, granulocytes and cytotoxic T-cells respectively.

Low-level expression of xxx may have implications for the aetiology of AIDS.
Impressively, less than 100 of such cells can prevent death in a lethally irradiated animal.

The thymus provides the environment for T-cell differentiation 

The gland is organized into a series of lobules based upon meshworks of epithelial cells derived embryologically from an outpushing of the gut endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouch and which form well-defined cortical and medullary zones (figure 9.3).
Monoclonal antibodies raised against thymic epithelial cells reveal six staining patterns by immunofluorescence, which show marked species consistency.
There is shared antigen expression between subcapsular, perivascular and medullary epithelium and distinct antigens in the cortical epithelial cells, one of which is the xxx receptor.
This framework of cells provides the micro-environment for T-cell differentiation and produces a series of peptide hormones of which four have been well characterized and sequenced: thymulin, xxx and xxx thymosin, and thymopoieNn (and its active pentapeptide TP-5).
They mostly seem capable of promoting the appearance of T-cell differentiation markers and a variety of T-cell functions on culture with bone marrow cells in vitro , but while it seems clear that they will be concerned with the many differentiation steps within the thymus, the details of how they operate and integrate in vivo are still lacking.

Figure 9.1

The multipotential haemopoietic stem cell and its progeny.

Figure 9.2

Haemopoiesis requires normal bone marrow stem cells differentiating in a normal micro-environment. 

(The W locus codes far the c-kit oncogene, a tyrosine kinase membrane receptor on stem cells; Sl locus might encode the ligand for this receptor).

The specialized large epithelial cells in the outer cortex are known as 'nurse' cells because they can each be associated with large numbers of Lymphocytes which do appear to be Lying within their cytoplasm.
The epithelial cells of the deep cortex have branched dendritic processes rich in class II MHC.
They connect through desmosomes to form a network through which cortical Lymphocytes must pass on their way to the medulla (figure 9.3).
The cortical Lymphocytes are densely packed compared with those in the medulla, many are in division and a surprising number are in the throes of dying as evidenced by their pyknotic nuclei.
On their way to the medulla, the Lymphocytes pass a cordon of 'sentinel' macrophages at the cortico-medullary junction.

A number of bone-marrow-derived interdigitating dendritic cells are present in the medulla and the epithelial cells have broader processes than their cortical counterparts and express high levels of both class I and class II MHC.

Whorled, possibly degenerate aggregates of epithelial cells form the highly characteristic Hassall's corpuscles beloved of histopathology examiners.

Figure 9.3

Cellular features of a thymus lobule.

See text for description.
(Adapted from Hood LE, Weissman IL, Wood WB '&' Wilson IH (1984) Immunology, 2nd edn, p. 261, Benjamin Cummings Publishing Co, California).

A fairly complex relationship with the nervous system awaits discovery; the thymus is richly innervated with both adrenergic and cholinergic fibres, while the neurotransmitter oxytocin, vasopressin and neurophysin are synthesized endogenously by subcapsular, perivascular and medullary epithelial cells and nurse cells.
Acute stress leads to an indecently rapid loss of cortical thymocytes and an increase in epithelial cells expressing both cortical and medullary markers surely intrathymic epithelial stem cells?
The destruction of cortical thymocytes is at least partly due to the cytolytic action of steroids, the relative invulnerability of the medullary Lymphocytes being attributable to their possession of a xxx -hydroxyl steroid dehydrogenase.
The distinctive nature of the two main compartments in the gland is emphasized by the selective atrophy induced by a number of agents; thus the primary target of organotin is the immature cortical thymocyte, dioxin interacts with a receptor on cortical epithelial cells, while the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporin A causes atrophy of all the medullary elements thereby blocking differentiation of cortical to medullary thymocyte with intriguing consequences.

There is a general view that the thymus involutes with age, but this may be less extreme than the description in many textbooks since quite large normal thymuses can be found in adults at autopsy while involution in other samples could be due to stress associated with illness before death.

Bone marrow stem cells become immunocompetent T-cells in the thymus 

The evidence comes from experiments on the reconstitution of irradiated hosts.
An irradiated animal is restored by bone marrow grafts through the immediate restitution of granulocyte precursors; in the longer term also through reconstitution of the T- and B-cells destroyed by irradiation.
However, if the animal is thymectomized before irradiation, bone marrow cells will not reconstitute the T-lymphocyte population (figure 9.4).

By day 11-12 in the mouse embryo, Lymphoblastoid stem cells from the bone marrow begin to colonize the periphery of the epithelial thymus rudiment.
If the thymus is removed at this stage and incubated in organ culture, a whole variety of mature T-lymphocytes will be generated.
This is not seen if 10-day thymuses are cultured and shows that the lymphoblastoid colonizers give rise to the immunocompetent small Lymphocyte progeny.

Differentiation is accompanied by changes in surface markers 

The incoming prothymocyte attracted to the thymus by thymotaxin, a chemotactic factor, stains positively for the enzyme TdT (figure 9.5) which is thought to be involved in the insertion of nucleotide sequences at the N-terminal region of D and J variable region segments to increase diversity of the T-cell receptors (cf. p. 59).

The cortical thymocytes soon express the surface markers CD2 and CD7 and, under the influence of IL-1 and perhaps through engagement of CD2 with LFA-3 on stromal cells, the gene encoding IL-2 is activated.
This in turn induces expression of the full IL-2 receptor and a massive autocrine expansion of the cortical thymocytes is set in train.
CD1 and CD5 together with CD3, the invariant signal transducing complex of the T-cell receptor, next appear and then the cells begin to express T-cell receptor variable chains.
At this stage the cells do not stain for surface CD4 or CD8, the markers of the helper/inducer and cytotoxic/suppressor subsets respectively, but subsequently, the cells which have rearranged their xxx and xxx cell receptor genes now become double positive xxx .

Finally the cells traverse the corticomedullary junction to the medulla where the CD4 and CD8 markers segregate in parallel with differentiation into separate immunocompetent populations of T-helpers and cytotoxic T-cell precursors (figure 9.5).

The precise lineage of NK cells is still in doubt.
They express the markers CD2, 3 and 8 which are normally restricted to T-cells, they have IL-2 receptors and are driven to proliferate by IL-2 and they can produce xxx .
Their T-receptor V genes are not rearranged but they must be related to T-cells in some way.

Figure 9.4

Maturation of bone marrow stem cells under the influence of the thymus to become immunocompetent Lymphocytes capable of cell-mediated immune reactions.

X-irradiation (X) destroys the ability of host Lymphocytes to mount a cellular immune response but the stem cells in injected bone marrow can become immunocompetent and restore the response (1) unless the thymus is removed (2), in which case only already immunocompetent Lymphocytes are effective (3).

Incidentally, the bone marrow stem cells also restore the levels of other formed elements of the blood (red cells, platelets, neutrophils, monocytes) which otherwise fall dramatically after X-irradiation and such therapy is crucial in cases where accidental or therapeutic exposure to X-rays or other anti-mitotic agents seriously damages the haemopoietic cells.

Receptor rearrangement 

The rearrangement of V, D, J and C region genes required to generate the T-cell receptor (p. 58) has not yet taken place at the prothymocyte stage.
The xxx gene for xxx and the recombinase activator gene are transcribed at the pre-T stage and, by day 15, cells with the xxx can be detected in the mouse thymus followed on day 19 by the appearance of xxx (figure 9.6).
Mice expressing rearranged xxx and xxx transgenes do not rearrange any further xxx or xxx gene segments, indicating that once a cell expresses a given V, D, J combination, it suppresses rearrangement of the xxx genes on the sister chromatid (remember each cell contains two chromosomes for each xxx and xxx cluster, one from each parent).
Thus each cell expresses only a single xxx receptor and the process by which the homologous genes on the sister chromatid are suppressed is called allelic exclusion (cf. p. 185).
Shorter xxx and xxx transgene constructs which lack a cis-acting 'silencer' region greatly inhibited the generation of xxx T-cell clones while enhancing the number of xxx cells.

Figure 9.5

Differentiation of T-cells within the thymus gland. 

Numbers refer to CD designation. xxx receptors. 
xxx receptors terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase.

xxx cells in the mouse, unlike the human, predominate in association with epithelial cells.

A curious feature of the cells leaving the fetal thymus is the restriction in V-gene utilization.
Thus virtually all of the first wave of fetal xxx cells express the same V-genes and colonize the skin; the second wave use the same o-gene combination but a different xxx pair and they seed the female reproductive organs (figure 9.7).
In adult life, there is far more receptor diversity due to a high degree of junctional variation (cf. p. 59) although the intraepithelial cells in the intestine and those in encapsulated Lymphoid tissue form two distinct groups with respect to single V gene usage.
By contrast, xxx cells are much more heterogeneous in V-gene expression.

Figure 9.6

The appearance of mature xxx and xxx receptor positive T-cells in the thymus with time.

(Data reproduced from Tonegawa et al (1989) Progress in Immunology 7, 243, Melchers F et al (eds), Springer-Verlag, Berlin).

Cells are positively selected for self-MHC restriction in the thymus 

The ability of T-cells to recognize antigenic peptides in association with self-MHC is developed in the thymus gland.
If an xxx animal is sensitized to an antigen, the primed T-cells can recognize that antigen on presenting cells of either xxx or xxx haplotype, i.e. they can use either parental haplotype as a recognition restriction element.
However, if bone marrow cells from the ( xxx are used to reconstitute an irradiated F1 which had earlier been thymectomized and given an xxx thymus, the subsequently primed T-cells can only recognize antigens in the context of xxx , not of xxx (figure 9.8).
Thus it is the phenotype of the thymus that imprints H-2 restriction on the differentiating T-cells.

It will also be seen in figure 9.8 that incubation of the thymus graft with deoxyguanosine, which destroys the cells of macrophage and dendritic cell lineage, has no effect on imprinting suggesting that this function is carried out by epithelial cells.
These cells are rich in surface MHC molecules and the current view is that double positive xxx T-cells bearing receptors which recognize self-MHC on the epithelial cells are positively selected for differentiation to xxx or xxx single positive cells.
The evidence for this comes largely from transgenic mice in which the appropriate genes are introduced artificially into fertilized eggs.
Since this is a very active area, I would like to cite some experimental examples; non-professionals may need to hang on to their haplotypes, put on their ice-packs and concentrate.

Figure 9.7

Predominant development of mouse xxx T-cell subsets in fetal and adult thymus.

Adult receptors show a high degree of junctional diversity. 
(Reference as in figure 9.6).

One highly sophisticated study starts with a cytotoxic T-cell clone raised in xxx females against male cells of the same strain.
The clone recognizes the male antigen, xxx , and this is seen in association with the xxx self-MHC molecules, i.e. it reacts with the xxx complex.

The xxx and xxx clones forming the T-cell receptor of this clone are now introduced as transgenes into mice with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) which lack the ability to rearrange their own germ-line variable region receptor genes; thus the only T-cell receptor which could possibly be expressed is that of the transgene, provided of course, we are looking at females rather than males in whom the clone would be eliminated by self-reactivity.
If the transgenic SCID females bear the original xxx haplotype (e.g. xxx hybrids between xxx haplotypes) then the anti xxx receptor is amply expressed on xxx cytotoxic precursor cells (table 9.1a), whereas xxx transgenics lacking xxx produce only double xxx thymocytes with no single xxx cells.
Thus as xxx cells express their TCR transgene, they only differentiate into xxx immunocompetent cells if they come into contact with thymic epithelial cells of the MHC haplotype recognized by their receptor.
We say that such self-recognizing thymocytes are being positively selected .

Figure 9.8

Imprinting of xxx T-helper restriction by the thymus.

Host mice were xxx crosses between strains of haplotype xxx .
They were thymectomized and grafted with 14 day fetal thymuses, irradiated and reconstituted with xxx bone marrow.
After priming with the antigen, keyhole limpet haemocyanin (KLH), the proliferative response of lymph node T-cells to KLH on antigen-presenting cells of each parental haplotype was assessed.
In some experiments the thymus lobes were cultured in deoxyguanosine (dGuo) which destroys intrathymic cells of macrophage/ dendritic cell lineage.
(From Lo D Sprent J (1986) Nature 319, 672).

In another example, genes coding for an xxx receptor from a T-helper clone (2B4) which responds to moth cytochrome c in association with the class II molecule xxx (remember xxx has an xxx and chain), are transfected into xxx and xxx mice. xxx express the xxx molecule on the surface of their antigen-presenting cells, but xxx do not.
In the event, the frequency of circulating xxx bearing the xxx receptor was 10 times greater in the xxx relative to xxx strains, again speaking for positive selection of double positive thymocytes which recognize their own thymic MHC.
In a further twist to the story, positive selection only occurred in mice manipulated to express xxx on their cortical rather than their medullary epithelial cells, showing that this differentiation step is affected before the developing thymocytes reach the medulla.

IMMUNITY TO INFECTION 

Prophylaxis and Immunodeficiency 

The control of infection is approached from several directions.
One method of breaking the chain of infection has been achieved in the UK with rabies and psittacosis by controlling the importation of dogs and parrots respectively.
Improvements in public health water supply, sewage systems, education in personal hygiene - prevent the spread of cholera and many other diseases.

And of course when other measures fail we can fall back on the induction of immunity.

Passively acquired immunity 

Temporary protection against infection can be established by giving preformed antibody from another individual of the same or a different species.
As the acquired antibodies are utilized by combination with antigen or catabolized in the normal way, this protection is gradually lost.

Horse globulins containing anti-tetanus and antidiphtheria toxins have been extensively employed prophylactically, but at the present time the practice is more restricted because of the complication of serum sickness developing in response to the foreign protein.

This is more likely to occur in subjects already sensitized by previous contact with horse globulin; thus individuals who have been given horse anti-tetanus ( for immediate protection after receiving a wound out in the open) are later advised to undergo a course of active immunization to obviate the need for further injections of horse protein in any subsequent emergency.

Maternally acquired antibody 

In the first few months of life while the baby's own Lymphoid system is slowly getting under way, protection is afforded by maternally derived antibodies acquired by placental transfer and by intestinal absorption of colostral immunoglobulins.
The major immunoglobulin in milk is secretory xxx and this is not absorbed by the baby but remains in the intestine to protect the mucosal surfaces.
In this respect it is quite striking that the xxx antibodies are directed against bacterial and viral antigens often present in the intestine, and it is presumed that xxx producing cells, responding to gut antigens, migrate and colonize breast tissue (as part of the MALT immune system; p. 110) where the antibodies they produce appear in the milk.

Pooled human xxx globulin 

Preparations of pooled human adult xxx globulin are of value to modify the effects of chicken pox or measles, particularly in individuals with defective immune responses such as premature infants, children with primary immunodeficiency or protein malnutrition or patients on steroid treatment.
Contacts with cases of infectious hepatitis and smallpox may also be afforded protection by xxx globulin, especially when in the latter case the material is derived from the serum of individuals vaccinated some weeks previously.
Human anti-tetanus immunoglobulin is preferable to horse anti-toxin which can cause serum reactions.

Isolated xxx globulin preparations tend to form small aggregates spontaneously and these can lead to severe anaphylactic reactions when administered intravenously on account of their ability to aggregate platelets and to activate complement and generate xxx and xxx anaphylatoxins.
For this reason the material is always injected intramuscularly.

Preparations free of aggregates are available and separate pools with raised antibody titres to selected organisms such as vaccinia, Herpes zoster , tetanus and perhaps rubella would be welcome.
This need may ultimately be satisfied as it becomes possible to produce human monoclonal antibodies on demand.

Cultured antibodies made to order 

The techniques for producing human monoclonal antibodies to predetermined specificities still leave something to be desired but they are improving steadily.

Restlessly we look to recombinant DNA technology to engineer antibodies of very high affinity.
We described different approaches to the production of antibodies which circumvent the need for intervention by a host immune system such as the single chain xxx construct and the single xxx domain antibodies.

The latter being so small may well be capable of reaching cell receptors on viruses which are tucked away at the bottom of protein canyons where they might be inaccessible to the xxx of an intact antibody.

It should be possible to generate high affinities from these single domain antibodies and, in one experiment, random mutation of four central residues in the xxx of antilysozyme yielded one mutant, out of a very large number, with higher affinity than the parent.

Vaccination 

Herd immunity 

In the case of tetanus, active immunization is of benefit to the individual but not to the community since it will not eliminate the organism which is formed in the faeces of domestic animals and persists in the soil as highly resistant spores.
Where a disease depends on human transmission, immunity in just a proportion of the population can help the whole community if it leads to a fall in the production rate (i.e. the number of further cases produced by each infected individual) to less than one; under these circumstances the disease will die out, witness for example the disappearance of diphtheria from communities in which around 75% of the children have been immunized (figure 11.1).
In Contrast, focal outbreaks of poliomyelitis have occurred in communities which object to immunization on religious grounds.

Strategic considerations 

The objective of vaccination is to provide effective immunity by establishing adequate levels of antibody and a primed population of cells which can rapidly expand on renewed contact with antigen and so provide protection against infection.
Sometimes, as with polio infection, a high blood titre of antibody is required; in mycobacterial diseases such as TB, a macrophage-activating cell-mediated immunity is most effective, whereas with influenza virus infection, cytotoxic T-cells probably play a significant role.
The site of the immune response evoked by vaccination may also be most important.
For example in cholera, antibodies need to be in the gut lumen to inhibit adherence to and colonization of the intestinal wall.

Figure 11.1

Notification of diphtheria in England and Wales per 100000 population showing dramatic fall after immunization.

Reproduced from Immunisation by G Dick, 1978, Update Books; with kind permission of author and publishers.

Eradication of the infectious agent is not always the most practical goal.
To take the example of malaria, the blood-borne form releases molecules which trigger TNF and other cytokines from monocytes and the secretion of these mediators is responsible for the unpleasant effects of the disease.
Accordingly, an antibody response targetted to these released antigens with structurally conserved epitopes may be a more realistic strategy than running after the more elusive antigen-swapping parasite itself.
Under these circumstances life with the parasite might be acceptable.

In addition to an ability to engender effective immunity, a number of mundane but none the less crucial conditions must be satisfied for a vaccine to be considered successful.
The andgens must be readily available, the preparation should be stable under extreme climatic conditions, preferably not requiring refrigeration, it should be cheap and, certainly, safe.

Clearly the first contact with antigen during vaccination should not be injurious and the manoeuvre is to avoid the pathogenic effects of infection while maintaining protective immunogens.

Killed organisms as vaccines 

The simplest way to destroy the ability of microbes to cause disease yet maintain their antigenic constitution is to prevent their replication by killing in an appropriate manner.
Parasitic worms and, to a lesser extent, protozoa are extremely difficult to grow up in bulk to manufacture killed vaccines.
This problem does not arise for many bacteria and viruses and, in these cases, the inactivated micro-organisms have generally provided safe antigens for immunization.

Examples are typhoid (in combination with the relatively ineffective paratyphoid A and B), cholera and killed poliomyelitis (Salk) vaccines.
The success of the Salk vaccine was slightly marred by a small rise in the incidence of deaths from poliomyelitis in 1960-61 (figure 11.2) but this has now been attributed to poor antigenicity of one of the three different strains of virus used and present-day vaccines are far more potent.

Care has to be taken to ensure that important protective antigens are not destroyed in the inactivation process.

During the production of an early killed measles vaccine, the fusion antigen which permits cellular spread of virus was inactivated; as a result, incomplete immunity was produced and this left the individual susceptible to the development of immunopathological complications on subsequent natural infection.
The dangers of incomplete immunity are especially worrying in areas where measles is endemic and the immune response is relatively enfeebled due to protein malnutrition.
Since the widespread correction of this dietary deficiency is unlikely in the near future, it is worth considering whether non-specific stimulation by immunopotentiating drugs or thymus hormones at the time of vaccination might provide a feasible solution.

Figure 11.2

Notifications of paralytic poliomyelitis in England and Wales showing the beneficial effects of community immunization with killed and live vaccines. 

Reproduced from Immunisation by G Dick, 1978, Update Books: with kind permission of author and publishers.

This idea of supplementing a deficient adaptive immune response with some synergistic treatment has surfaced in other contexts.
Thus, the antibiotic polymyxin B is too toxic for normal use; however, if certain end groups are removed, the molecule loses its toxicity but still retains its ability to disturb the outer wall of Gram-negative bacteria thereby allowing potentially lytic antibodies and complement to reach previously inaccessible bacterial inner membranes.

Another curious phenomenon which might be exploited is the finding that the amoeba Entamoeba histolytica , which is resistant to Lysis by antibody and complement, shows greatly increased susceptibility if treated with an otherwise non-toxic protein inhibitor.

Live attenuated organisms have many advantages as vaccines 

The objective of attenuation is to produce a modified organism which mimics the natural behaviour of the original microbe without causing significant disease.
In many instances the immunity conferred by killed vaccines, even when given with adjuvant (see below), is often inferior to that resulting from infection with live organisms.
This must be partly because the replication of the living microbes con fronts the host with a larger and more sustained dose of antigen and that, with budding viruses, infected cells are required for the establishment of good cytotoxic T-cell memory.
Another significant advantage of using live organisms is that the immune response takes place largely at the site of the natural infection.
This is well illustrated by the nasopharyngeal xxx response to immunization with polio vaccine.
In contrast with the ineffectiveness of parenteral injection of killed vaccine, intranasal administration evoked a good local antibody response; but whereas this declined over a period of 2 months or so, per oral immunization with live attenuated virus established a persistently high xxx antibody level (figure 11.3).

Classical methods of attenuation 

The objective of attenuation, that of producing an organism which causes only a very mild form of the natural disease, can be equally well attained by using strains which are virulent for another species, but avirulent in man.
The best example of this was Jenner's remarkable demonstration that cowpox would protect against smallpox.
Since then, a global effort by the World Health Organization combining extensive vaccination and selective epidemiological control methods, has eradicated the human disease.

Attenuation itself can be achieved by modifying the conditions under which an organism grows.

Figure 11.3

Local xxx response to polio vaccine. 

Local secretory antibody synthesis is confined to the specific anatomical sites which have been directly stimulated by contact with antigen. 
(Data from Ogra PL et al (1975) I, Viral Immunology and Immunopathology, p 67.
Notkins A L (ed).
Academic Press, New York).

Pasteur first achieved the production of live but non-virulent forms of chicken cholera bacillus and anthrax by such artifices as culture at higher temperatures and under anaerobic conditions, and was able to confer immunity by infection with the attenuated organisms.
A virulent strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis became attenuated by chance in 1908 when Calmette and Guรฉrin at the Institut Pasteur, Lille, added bile to the culture medium in an attempt to achieve dispersed growth.
After 13 years of culture in bile-containing medium, the strain remained attenuated and was used successfully to vaccinate children against tuberculosis.
The same organism, BCG (Bacille, Calmette, Guรฉrin), is widely used today for immunization of tuberculin-negative individuals; it will also bestow a reasonable degree of protection against Mycobacterium Leprae provided the response to the group i cross-reacting antigens have not been subverted by exposure to suppressive species of mycobacteria in the local environment.
Attenuation by cold adaptation of influenza and other respiratory viruses seems hopeful; the organism can grow at the lower temperatures (32-34ยบ C) of the upper respiratory tract, but fails to produce clinical disease because of its inability to replicate in the lower respiratory tract (37ยบ C).

Attenuation by recombinant DNA technology 

Genetic recombination is being used to develop various attenuated strains of viruses such as influenza with lower virulence for man and some with an increased multiplication rate in eggs (enabling newly endemic strains of influenza to be adapted for rapid vaccine production).
The potential is clearly quite enormous.

The tropism of attenuated organisms for the site at which natural infection occurs is likely to be exploited dramatically in the near future to establish gut immunity to typhoid and cholera using attenuated forms of Salmonella strains and Vibrio cholerae in which the virulence genes have been identified and modified by genetic engineering.

Microbial vectors for other genes 

An ingenious trick is to use a virus as a 'piggy-back' for genes from another virus particularly one that cannot be grown successfully, or which is inherently dangerous.
Large DNA viruses such as vaccinia can act as carriers for one or many foreign genes while retaining infectivity for animals and cultured cells.
The proteins encoded by these genes are appropriately expressed with respect to glycosylation and secretion, and are processed for MHC presentation by the infected cells thus effectively giving rise to both humoral and cell-mediated immunity.
An example of a construct in which vaccinia is a vector for an inserted foreign gene is described in figure 11.4.

A wide variety of genes has been expressed by vaccinia virus vectors and it has been demonstrated that the products of genes coding for viral envelope proteins such as influenza virus haemagglutinin, vesicular stomatis virus glycoprotein, xxx and herpes simplex virus glycoprotein D, could be correctly processed and inserted into the plasma membrane of infected cells.
Hepatitis surface antigen ( xxx ) was secreted from recombinant vaccinia virus infected cells as the characteristic 22 nm particles.
It is an impressive approach and chimpanzees have been protected against the clinical effects of hepatitis B virus, while mice inoculated with the influenza haemagglutinin recombinant generated cytotoxic T-cells and were protected against influenza infection.
Spectacular neutralizing antibody titres were produced by a recombinant with the gene encoding rabies virus glycoprotein and protected animals against a severe intracerebral challenge.
It is even possible to make a vector with two inserts.

No system is trouble-free and some recombinants grow poorly in vivo .
Furthermore, immunodeficient individuals have difficulty in clearing the virus, although the resistance of nude mice lacking T-cells to 10 8 plaque-forming units of recombinant vaccinia expressing the IL-2 gene suggests a way round this problem.
There is also the objection that a viral vaccine which produces occasional but serious sideeffects should not be used in a world free of smallpox.
Perhaps less virulent strains can be developed, but in any case the real issue, as ever, is whether the recombinant vaccine causes more problems than the disease for which a vaccine is sought.
For veterinary use, of course, there is no problem and excellent results have been obtained with rinderpest in cattle, for example.

Although based on the same principles as those used for vaccinia virus, there may be a more favourable climate regarding the acceptance of hybrid polio viruses as potential vaccines, and HIV, hepatitis A and foot and mouth disease virus genes have all been inserted into the polio genome and shown to produce neutralizing antibodies.

Attention has turned to BCG as a vehicle for antigens required to evoke xxx mediated T-cell immunity.
The organism is avirulent, has a low frequency of serious complications, can be administered any time after birth, has strong adjuvant properties, gives long-lasting CMI after a single injection and is a bargain at around US$ 0.05 a shot.
The development of shuttle vectors which can replicate in E coli as plasmids and in mycobacteria as phages has allowed foreign DNA to be introduced into M smegmatis and BCG vaccine strains.
We can expect many advances on this front: thus incorporation of a gene for kanamycin resistance into the plasmid provides a selectable marker for transformed bacteria, while inclusion of a signal sequence permits secretion of the recombinant protein.

There is an attractive possibility that the oral route of vaccination may be applicable not only for the establishment of gut mucosal immunity but also for providing systemic protection.
For example, Salmonella typhimurium not only invades the mucosal lining of the gut, but also infects cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system throughout the body thereby stimulating the production of humoral and secretory antibodies as well as cell-mediated immunity.
Attenuated Salmonella can be made to express proteins from Shigella , cholera, malaria, sporozoites and so on, and it is entirely feasible to consider these as potential oral vaccines.

Thus, the circumsporozoite antigen construct given orally to mice inhibits the development of the parasite liver stages; that this occurred in the absence of antibody supports the view that CMI can be effective.

Constraints on the use of attenuated vaccines 

Attenuated vaccines for poliomyelitis (Sabin), measles and rubella have gained general acceptance.
None the less, with certain vaccines there is a very small, but still real, risk of developing complications such as the encephalitis which can occur following measles immunization; note, however, that the natural infection carries a far greater risk of encephalitis (c.

1:2000)!
With live viral vaccines there is a possibility that the nucleic acid might be incorporated into the host's genome or that there may be reversion to a virulent form, although this will be unlikely if the attenuated strains contain several mutations.
Another disadvantage of attenuated strains is the difficulty and expense of maintaining appropriate cold storage facilities especially in out-of-the-way places.
In diseases such as viral hepatitis and cancer, the dangers associated with live vaccines would make their use unthinkable.
It cam~of be emphasized too often, that the risk of complication must be balanced against the expected chance of contracting the disease with its own complications.
Where this is minimal some may prefer to avoid general vaccination and to rely upon a crash course backed up if necessary by passive immunization in the localities around isolated outbreaks of infectious disease.

Figure 11.4

Construction of vaccinia virus recombinants that express a foreign gene.

The gene in question, say encoding hepatitis surface antigen ( xxx ), is first inserted into an appropriate vector so that it is adjacent to a vaccinia promoter and flanking vaccinia DNA sequences (in this case thymidine kinase - TK) which determines the site of recombination with the virus.
The plasmid is replicated and then used to transfect cells that are simultaneously infected with vaccinia.
Homologous recombination inserts the promoter plus foreign gene into the viral genome and the resulting TK recombinant is selected by picking viral plaques resistant to 5-bromodeoxyuridine ( xxx ), TK is not essential for viral growth. 
(Reproduced from B Moss (1985) Immunology Today 6, 243, with permission).

It is important to recognize those children with immunodeficiency before injection of live organisms; a child with impaired T-cell reactivity can become overwhelmed by xxx and die.
Perhaps this is only a sick story, but it is said that in one particular country there are no adults with T-cell deficiency.
The reason? 
All children had been immunized with live xxx as part of a community health programme(!).

The extent to which children with partial deficiencies are at risk has yet to be assessed.
It is also inadvisable to give live vaccines to patients being treated, with steroids, immunosuppressive drugs or radiotherapy or who have malignant conditions such as Lymphoma and leukaemia; pregnant mothers must also be included here because of the vulnerability of the fetus.

The deviating influence of maternally derived xxx antibody has been discussed in an earlier chapter.
Injection of preformed (monoclonal) xxx antibody at the time of immunization with a malaria vaccine seemed to overcome this problem in young mice, but it remains to be seen whether this can be developed into a practical strategy.
Preliminary results suggest that infants of 4 - 6 months can be seroconverted by inhaled aerosol measles vaccine which presumably evades the maternal antibody; this will have singular relevance in endemic measles areas where almost split-second timing is required with conventional immunization as passively acquired antibody wanes.

TRANSPLANTATION 

Graft rejection 

The replacement of diseased organs by a transplant of healthy tissue has long been an objective in medicine but has been frustrated to no mean degree by the uncooperative attempts by the body to reject grafts from other individuals.
Before discussing the nature and implications of this rejection phenomenon, it would be helpful to define the terms used for transplants between individuals and species: 

Autograft - tissue grafted back on to the original donor.

Isograft - graft between syngeneic individuals (i.e. of identical genetic constitution) such as identical twins or mice of the same pure line strain.

Allograft (old term, homograft) - graft between allogeneic individuals (i.e. members of the same species but different genetic constitution), e.g. man to man and one mouse strain to another.

Xenograft (heterograft) - graft between xenogeneic individuals (i.e. of different species), e.g. pig to man.

It is with the allograft reaction that we have been most concerned although it should one day be possible to use grafts from other species.
The most common allografting procedure is probably blood transfusion where the unfortunate consequences of mismatching are well known.
Considerable attention has been paid to the rejection of solid grafts such as skin and the sequence of events is worth describing.
In mice, for example, the skin allograft settles down and becomes vascularized within a few days.
Between three and nine days the circulation gradually diminishes and there is increasing infiltration of the graft bed with Lymphocytes and monocytes but very few plasma cells.
Necrosis begins to be visible macroscopically and within a day or so the graft is sloughed completely (Figure 13.1).

Evidence that rejection is immunological 

First and second set reactions 

It would be expected, if the reaction has an immunological basis, that the second contact with antigen would represent a more explosive event than the first and indeed the rejection of a second graft from the same donor is much accelerated.
The initial vascularization is poor and may not occur at all.
There is a very rapid invasion by polymorphonuclear leucocytes and Lymphoid cells including plasma cells.
Thrombosis and acute cell destruction can be seen by three to four days.

Specificity 

Second set rejection is not the fate of all subsequent allografts but only of those derived from the original donor or a related strain.
Grafts from unrelated donors are rejected as first set reactions.

Figure 13.1

Rejection of CBA skin graft by strain A mouse.

(a) 10 days after transplantation; discoloured areas caused by destruction of epithelium and drying of the exposed dermis. 
(b) 13 days after transplantation; the scabby surface indicates total destruction of the graft.
(Courtesy Prof L Brent).

Role of the Lymphocyte 

Neonatally thymectomized animals have difficulty in rejecting skin grafts but their capacity is restored by injection of Lymphocytes from a syngeneic normal donor, suggesting that T-cells are implicated.
The recipient of T-cells from a donor which has already rejected a graft will give accelerated rejection of a further graft of the same type (figure 13.2) showing that the Lymphoid cells are primed and retain memory of the first contact With graft antigens.

Production of antibodies 

After rejection, humoral antibodies with specificity for the graft donor may be recognized.
In the mouse where the erythrocytes carry transplantation antigens, haemagglutination tests become positive; in the human, lymphocytotoxins are found.
A Jerne plaque test using donor strain thymocytes in place of sheep erythrocytes will often demonstrate the presence of antibody-forming cells in the lymphoid tissues of grafted animals.

Genetic control of transplantation antigens 

Figure 13.2

Graft rejection induces memory which is specific and can be transferred by T-cells.

In experiment 1, an A strain recipient of T-cells from another A strain mouse which had rejected a graft from strain B, will give accelerated (i.e. 2nd set) rejection of a B graft.
Experiments 2 and 3 show the specificity of the phenomenon with respect to the genetically unrelated third party strain C. 

The specificity of the antigens involved in graft rejection is under genetic control.
Genetically identical individuals such as mice of a pure strain or uniovular twins have identical transplantation antigens and grafts can be freely exchanged between them.
The Mendelian segregation of the genes Controlling these antigens has been revealed by interbreeding experiments between mice of different pure strains.
Since these mice breed true within a given strain and always accept grafts from each other, they must be homozygous for the 'transplantation' genes.
Consider two such strains A and B with allelic genes differing at one locus.
In each case paternal and maternal genes will be identical and they will have a genetic constitution of, say, A/A an d B/B respectively (by convention, the genes are expressed in italics and the antigens they encode in normal type).
Crossing strains A and B gives a first familial generation (F1) of constitution A/B.
Now all F1 mice accept grafts from either parent showing that they are tolerant to both A and B.
By intercrossing the F1 generation one would expect an average distribution of genotypes for the F2s as shown in figure 13.3; only 1 in 4 would have no A genes and would therefore reject an A graft because of lack of tolerance, and I in 4 would reject B grafts for the same reason.
Thus for each locus, 3 out of 4 of the F2 generation will accept parental strain grafts.

Extending the analysis, if instead of one locus with a pair of allelic genes there were n loci, the fraction of the F2 generation accepting parental strain grafts would be (3/4)n.
In this way an estimate of the number of loci controlling transplantation antigens can be made.

In the mouse around 40 such loci have been established, but as we have seen much earlier, the complex locus termed H-2 predominates in the sense that it controls the 'strong' transplantation antigens which provoke intense allograft reactions and we have looked at the structure (cf. figure 3.18, p. 52) and biology of this major histocompatibility locus in some detail in previous chapters.
The non-H-2 or 'minor' transplantation antigens such as the male H-Y are recognized as processed peptides in association with the MHC molecules on the cell surface by T-cells but not at all readily by B-cells.
One should not be misled by the term 'minor' into thinking that these antigens do not give rise to serious rejection problems, albeit more slowly than the MHC.

Figure 13.3

Inheritance of genes controlling transplantation antigens.

A represents a gene expressing the A antigen and B the corresponding allelic gene at the same genetic locus.
The pure strains are homozygous for AIA and B/B respectively.

Since the genes are co-dominant, an animal with AIB genome will express both antigens, become tolerant to them and therefore accept grafts from either A or B donors.
The illustration shows that for each gene controlling a transplantation antigen specificity, three-quarters of the F2 generation will accept a graft of parental skin.
For n genes the fraction is (3/4n).
If F1 A/B animals are back-crossed with an A/A parent, half the progeny will be A/A and half A/B; only the latter will accept B grafts.

Some other consequences of H-2 incompatibility 

Class II MHC differences produce a mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) 

When Lymphocytes from strains of mice of different class II haplotype are cultured together, blast cell transformation and mitosis occurs (MLR), the T-cells of each population of Lymphocytes reacting against MHC class II determinants on the surface of the other population.
For the 'one-way MLR', the stimulator cells are made unresponsive by treatment with mitomycin C or X-rays and then added to the responder Lymphocytes from the other donor.
The responding cells belong predominantly to a population of CD4 positive T-lymphocytes and are stimulated by the class II determinants present mostly on B-cells, macrophages and especially dendritic antigen-presenting cells.
Thus, the MLR is inhibited by antisera to class II determinants on the stimulator cells.

Cell-mediated Lympholysis (CML) 

The involvement of class II MHC antigens in the provocation of transplantation rejection has been brought into some focus by the discovery of the phenomenon of CML which was developed as a possible test for histocompatibility.
The principle is illustrated in figure 13.4.
In short, responder cells activated by the class II-induced MLR help in the generation of cytotoxic T-cells directed to the H-2D/ K determinants; in essence, the recognition of class II molecules helps to generate effectors against the class I molecules, in some ways reminiscent of the carrier-hapten system in T-B collaboration with class II equivalent to carrier and class I to hapten (cf. p. 121).

The graft-vs-host reaction (g.v.h.) 

Figure 13.4

Cell-mediated Lympholysis: generation of xxx T-cells cytotoxic for xxx grafts, J-helpers respond to xxx on the graft cells by proliferating (mixed Lymphocyte reaction) and are then able to help cytotoxic T-cell precursors specific for the xxx or xxx antigens of the graft to become cytotoxic effectors.

When competent T-cells are transferred from a donor to a recipient which is incapable of rejecting them, the grafted cells survive and have time to recognize the host antigens and react immunologically against them.

Instead of the normal transplantation reaction of host against graft, we have the reverse, the so-called graft-vs-host (g.v.h) reaction.
In the young rodent there can be inhibition of growth (runting), spleen enlargement and haemolytic anaemia (due to production of red cell antibodies).
In the human, fever, anaemia, weight loss, rash, diarrhoea and splenomegaly are observed with cytokines, especially TNF, being thought to be the major mediators of pathology.
The 'stronger' the transplantation antigen difference, the more severe that reaction.
Where donor and recipient differ at xxx or xxx loci, the consequences can be fatal, although it should be noted that reactions to dominant minor transplantation antigens, or combinations of them, may be equally difficult to control.

Two possible situations leading to gvh reactions are illustrated in figure 13.5.
In the human this may arise in immunologically anergic subjects receiving bone marrow grafts, e.g. for combined immunodeficiency (p. 243), for red ce&rsqb;l aplasia after radiation accidents or as a possible form of cancer therapy.
Competent T-cells in blood or present in grafted organs given to immunosuppressed patients may give gvh reactions; so could maternal cells which adventitiously cross the placenta, although in this case there is as yet no evidence of diseases caused by such a mechanism in the human.

Mechanisms of graft rejection 

Lymphocite-mediated rejection 

A great deal of the work on allograft rejection has involved transplants of skin or solid tumours because their fate is relatively easy to follow.
In these cases there is little support for the view that humoral antibodies are instrumental in destruction of the graft although, as we shall see later, this is not necessarily so with transplants of other organs such as the kidney.

Whereas passive transfer of serum from an animal which has rejected a skin allograft cannot usually accelerate the rejection of a similar graft on the recipient animal, injection of Lymphoid cells (particularly recirculating small Lymphocytes) is effective in shortening graft survival (cf. figure 13.2).

A primary role of Lymphoid cells in first set rejection would be consistent with the histology of the early reaction showing infiltration by mononuclear cells with very few polymorphs or plasma cells (figure 13.6).
The dramatic effect of neonatal thymectomy on prolonging skin transplants, as mentioned earlier, and the long survival of grafts on children with thymic deficiencies implicate the T-lymphocytes in these reactions.
In the chicken, homograft rejection and gvh reactivity are influenced by neonatal thymectomy but not bursectomy.
More direct evidence has come from in vitro studies showing that T-cells taken from mice rejecting an allograft could kill target cells bearing the graft antigens in vitro .

Recent work on the importance of murine xxx and human xxx cells as effectors has cast some doubt, probably wrongly, on the role of cytotoxic cells in graft rejection in vivo ; although sometimes xxx cells have cytotoxic potential for class II targets, as a rule they are associated with helper activity, in this case particularly for cytotoxic T-cell precursors, and with the production of Lymphokines mediating delayed hypersensitivity reactions.
Perhaps they act to encourage access of cytotoxic T-cells to their targets? 
We do know that xxx upregulates antigen expression on the target graft cell so increasing its vulnerability to xxx cytotoxic cells.

Figure 13.5

Graft-vs-host reaction.

When competent T-cells are inoculated into a host incapable of reacting against them, the grafted cells are free to react against the antigens on the host's cells which they recognize as foreign.
The ensuing reaction may be fatal.
Two of many possible situations are illustrated: (a) the hybrid AB receives cells from one parent (BB) which are tolerated but react against the A antigen on host cells; (b) an X-irradiated AA recipient restored immunologically with BB cells cannot react against the graft and a g.v.h. reaction will result.

Normal individuals have a very high frequency of alloreactive cells (i.e. cells which react with allografts) which presumably accounts for the intensity of MHC mismatched rejection.
Now, do these alloreactive T-cells recognize just the foreign MHC molecules alone or do they respond to foreign MHC associated with a host of different peptides derived from the cytoplasmic proteins of the graft by normal processing?
The latter seems to be true: alloreactive cytotoxic T-cells specific for xxx expressed on the murine tumour xxx , were unable to lyse human cells transfected with and expressing the xxx molecules unless an extract of xxx cytoplasmic proteins, cleaved to peptides by cyanogen bromide, was added to the system.

Thus, self-peptides expressed with MHC class I are responsible for allorecognition.

Figure 13.6

Acute early rejection of human renal allograft 10 days after transplantation showing dense cellular infiltration of interstitium by mononuclear cells (pyronin stain). 

Courtesy Prof K Porter.

The role of humoral antibody 

It has long been recognized that isolated allogeneic cells such as lymphocytes can be destroyed by cytotoxic (type 11) reactions involving humoral antibody.

However, although earlier experience with skin and solid tumour grafts suggested that they were not readily susceptible to the action of cytotoxic antibodies, it is now clear that this does not hold for all types of organ transplants.
Consideration of the different ways in which kidney allografts can be rejected illustrates the point.

Hyperacute rejection within minutes of transplantation, characterized by sludging of red cells and microthrombi in the glomeruli, occurs in individuals with pre-existing humoral andbodies - either due to blood group incompatibility or presensitization to class I MHC through blood transfusion.

Acute early rejection occurring up to 10 days or so after transplantation is characterized by dense cellular infiltration (figure 13.6) and rupture of peritubular capillaries and appears to be a cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction involving T-lymphocytes probably compounded by xxx cytotoxic attack on graft cells whose MHC antigen expression has been upregulated by xxx interferon.

Acute late rejection , which occurs from 11 days onwards in patients suppressed with prednisone and azathioprine, is probably caused by the binding of immunoglobulin (presumably antibody) and complement to the arterioles and glomerular capillaries where they can be visualized by immunofluorescent techniques.
These immunoglobulin deposits on the vessel walls induce platelet aggregation in the glomerular capillaries leading to acute renal shutdown (figure 13.7).
The possibility of damage to antibody-coated cells through antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity must also be considered.

Insidious and late rejection associated with subendothelial deposits of immunoglobulin and xxx on the glomerular basement membranes which may sometimes be an expression of an underlying immune complex disorder (originally necessitating the transplant) or possibly of complex formation with soluble antigens derived from the grafted kidney.

The complexity of the action and interaction of cellular and humoral factors in graft rejection is therefore considerable and an attempt to summarize the postulated mechanisms involved is presented in figure 13.8.

There are also circumstances when antibodies may actually protect a graft from destruction And this important phenomenon of enhancement will be considered further below.

AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES 

Pathogenesis, Diagnosis and Treatment 

Pathogenic mechanisms in autoimmune disease 

We have mentioned that despite certain exceptions as, for instance, myocardial infarction or damage to the testis, traumatic release of organ constituents does not in general elicit antibody formation.
Destruction of thyroid tissue by therapeutic doses of radio-iodine does not initiate thyroid autoimmunity, nor does damage to the liver in alcoholic cirrhosis result in the synthesis of mitochondrial antibodies, to give but two examples.
We should now look at the evidence which bears directly on the issue of whether autoimmunity, however it arises, plays a primary pathogenic role in the production of tissue lesions in the group of diseases labelled as 'autoimmune'.

Effects of humoral antibody 

Blood 

The erythrocyte antibodies play a role in the destruction of red cells in autoimmune haemolytic anaemia.
Normal red cells coated with autoantibody eluted from Coombs' positive erythrocytes have a shortened half-life after reinjection into the normal subject.
Platelet antibodies are apparently responsible for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
xxx from a patient's serum when given to a normal individual causes a depression of platelet counts and the active principle can be absorbed out with platelets.
The transient neonatal thrombocytopenia which may be seen in infants of mothers with ITP is explicable in terms of transplacental passage of xxx antibodies to the child.

Some children with immunodeficiency associated with very low white cell counts have a serum Lymphocytotoxic factor which requires complement for its activity.
Lymphopenia occurring in patients with SLE and rheumatoid arthritis may also be a direct result of antibody since non-agglutinating antibodies coating the white cells have been reported in such cases.

Thyroid 

Cytotoxic antibodies 

The serum of patients with Hashimoto's disease is cytotoxic for human thyroid cells growing in monolayer culture after dispersal by trypsin.

This is a typical complement-mediated antibody reaction directed against a cell surface antigen which is identical with the thyroid peroxidase antigen revealed by intracytoplasmic staining of thyroid sections with sera from Hashimoto patients.
Curiously, this antigen is expressed only on the apical portion of the follicular cells in contact with the colloid so that it is not normally accessible to circulating antibody.
This explains why simple fragments of thyroid which have intact follicles are unaffected by incubation in the presence of medium containing cytotoxic antibody and complement, and also why there is no evidence that infants born to Hashimoto mothers have defective thyroid function despite the presence of the antibody in their serum.
None the less, antibody can be detected on the inner surface of thyroid follicles in tissue removed from patients with autoimmune thyroiditis, and it seems necessary to postulate that thyroid damage only occurs when there is collaboration with other factors such as immune complex deposition, sensitized T-cell effectors or mechanisms which bring about a reversal of polarity of the epithelial cells.

Thyroid-stimulating antibodies 

Under certain circumstances antibodies to the surface of a cell may stimulate rather than destroy (cf type V sensitivity; Chapter 12).
This would seem to be the case in thyrotoxicosis (Graves' or Basedow's disease).
There has long been indirect evidence suggesting a link between autoimmune processes and this disease: thyroid antibodies are detectable in up to 85% of thyrotoxic patients and histologically the majority of the glands removed at operation show varying degrees of thyroiditis and local antibody formation in addition to the characterishc acinar cell hyperplasia; thyrotoxicosis is found with undue frequency in the families of Hashimoto patients; there is an association with gastric autoimmunity in that 30% have gastric antibodies and up to 10% pernicious anaemia.
The direct link came with the discovery by Adams and Purves of thyroid stimulating activity in the serum of thyrotoxic patients.
Using a new bioassay they found that the serum caused a stimulation of the thyroid gland of the recipient animal which was considerably prolonged relative to the time course of action of the physiological thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) from the pituitary; it was ultimately shown that this was due to the presence of thyroid stimulating antibodies (TSAb).
These antibodies can block the binding of TSH to thyroid membranes and seem to act in the same manner as TSH, probably by stimulating the identical receptors (cf. figure 12.20).
Both operate through the adenyl cyclase system as indicated by the potentiating effect of theophylline, and both produce similar changes in ultrastructural morphology in the thyroid cell, but it is one of Nature's 'passive transfer experiments' which links TSAb most directly with the pathogenesis of Graves' disease.
When TSAb from a thyrotoxic mother crosses the placenta it is associated with the production of neonatal hyperthyroidism (figure 15.1), which resolves after a few weeks as the maternal xxx is catabolized.

There is a good correlation between the titre of TSAb and the severity of hyperthyroidism.
Because TSAb act independently of the pituitary-thyroid axis, iodine uptake by the gland is unaffected by administration of thyroxine or tri-iodothyronine, whereas normally this would cause feedback inhibition and suppression of uptake; this forms the basis of an important diagnostic test for thyrotoxicosis.

There is reason to believe that enlargement of the thyroid in this disorder is due to the action of antibodies which react with a 'growth' receptor and directly stimulate cell division as distinct from metabolic hyperactivity, (figure 15.2a).
In contrast, sera from patients with primary myxoedema contain antibodies capable of blocking the mitogenic action of TSH (figure 15.2b) thereby preventing the regeneration of follicles which is a feature of the enlarged Hashimoto goitre.
We see now that there is considerable diversity in the autoimmune response to the thyroid leading to tissue destruction, metabolic stimulation, growth promotion or mitotic inhibition which in different combinations account for the variety of forms in which autoimmune thyroid disease presents (figure 15.3).

Figure 15.1

Neonatal thyrotoxicosis.

(a) The autoantibodies which stimulate the thyroid through the TSH-receptors are xxx and cross the placenta.
(b) The thyrotoxic mother therefore gives birth to a baby with thyroid hyperactivity which spontaneously resolves as the mother's xxx is catabolized.
(Photograph courtesy of Dr A. MacGregor).

Figure 15.2

Autoantibodies affecting thyroid growth.

(a) Stimulating antibodies in goitrous Graves' disease and autoimmune colloid goitre shown by the increase of cells entering the DNA synthetic (S) phase of the cell cycle in thyroid fragments treated with xxx from the patient's serum. p values relate to differences from results with normal xxx .
(b) Blocking antibodies in primary myxoedema revealed by the ability of patient's xxx to inhibit the growth stimulation caused by TSH.
Each point represents the value for an individual patient's serum.
(Data from Drexhage H.A., Bottazzo G.F., Doniach D., Bitensky L. '&' Chayen J. (1980) Lancet ii, 287 and from (1981) Nature 289, 594).

Stomach 

Autoantibodies to intrinsic factor, a product of gastric mucosal secretion were first demonstrated in pernicious anaemia patients by oral administration of intrinsic factor, vitamin B12 and the serum from a patient with this disease.
The serum was found to prevent intrinsic factor from mediating the absorption of B12 into the body, and further studies showed the active principle to be an antibody.
Circulating antibody does not seem to be capable of neutralizing the physiological activity of intrinsic factor; a patient immunized parenterally with hog intrinsic factor in complete Freund's adjuvant had high serum antibody levels and good cell-mediated skin responses but still absorbed B12 well when fed with hog intrinsic factor.
These data imply that the antibodies have to be present within the lumen of the gastro-intestinal tract to be biologically effective, and indeed they can be identified in the gastric juice of these patients, synthesized by plasma cells in the gastritic lesion.

While there is no evidence that antibodies which can block the gastrin receptor on parietal cells are capable of tissue destruction, it is odds on that they contribute to the hypo- and achlorhydria seen in pernicious anaemia and atrophic gastritis especially when there are residual parietal cells in the gastric mucosa.

The idea that some cases of gastric ulcer may result from stimulation of acid secretion by activation through antibodies to histamine receptors is appealing and we await the further work required to establish its validity.

Sperm 

In some infertile males, agglutinating antibodies cause aggregation of the spermatozoa and interfere with their penetration into the cervical mucus.

Glomerular basement membrane (gbm) 

With immunological kidney disease the experimental models preceded the finding of parallel lesions in the human.
Injection of cross-reacting heterologous gbm preparations in complete Freund's adjuvant produces glomerulonephritis in sheep and other experimental animals.
Antibodies to gbm can be picked up by immunofluorescent staining of biopsies from nephritic animals with anti xxx .
The antibodies are largely, if not completely, absorbed out by the kidney In vivo but they appear in the serum on nephrectomy and can passively transfer the disease to another animal of the same species.

An entirely analogous situation occurs in man in certain cases of glomerulonephritis, particularly those associated with lung haemorrhage (Goodpasture's syndrome).
Kidney biopsy from the patient shows linear deposition of xxx and C3 along the basement membrane of the glomerular capillaries (figure 12.13a).
After nephrectomy, xxx antibodies can be detected in the serum.
Lerner and his colleagues eluted the xxx antibody from a diseased kidney and injected it into a squirrel monkey.

The antibody rapidly fixed to the xxx of the recipient animal and produced a fatal nephritis (figure 15.4).
It is hard to escape the conclusion that the lesion in the human was the direct result of attack on the xxx by these complement-fixing antibodies.
The lung changes in Goodpasture's syndrome are attributable to cross-reaction with some of the xxx antibodies.

Figure 15.3

Relationship of different autoallergic responses to the circular spectrum of autoimmune thyroid diseases.

Responses involving thyroglobulin and the thyroid peroxidase microsomal surface microvillous antigen lead to tissue destruction whereas other autoantibodies can stimulate or block metabolic activity or thyroid cell division. 
'Hashitoxicosis' is the down-to-earth term used by our Scots' colleagues to describe a gland showing Hashimoto's thyroiditis and thyrotoxicosis simultaneously (courtesy of Prof D Doniach and Dr G F Bottazzo).

Figure 15.4

Passive transfer of glomerulonephritis to a squirrel monkey by injection of antiglomerular basement membrane (anti- xxx ) antibodies isolated by acid elution from the kidney of a patient with Goodpasture's syndrome (after Lerner R A, Glascock R J '&' Dixon F J (1967) J Exp Med 126, 989). 

Muscle 

The transient muscle weakness seen in a proportion of babies born to mothers with myasthenia gravis calls to mind neonatal thrombocytopenia and hyperthyroidism and would certainly be compatible with the transplacental passage of an xxx capable of inhibiting neuromuscular transmission.
Strong support for this view is afforded by the consistent finding of antibodies to muscle acetylcholine receptors in myasthenics and the depletion of these receptors within the motor end-plates.

In addition, myasthenic symptoms can be induced in animals by injection of monoclonal antibodies to acetylcholine receptors or by active immunization with the purified receptors themselves.
None the less, the majority of babies with myasthenic mothers do not display muscle disease and it transpires that they are protecting themselves by producing antibodies directed to idiotypes on the maternal autoantibodies.
Table 15.1. summarizes these direct pathogenic effects of humoral autoantibodies.

Table 15.1

Direct pathogenic effects of humoral antibodies. 

Effects of complexes 

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 

Where autoantibodies are formed against soluble components to which they have continual access, complexes may be formed which can give rise to lesions similar to those occurring in serum sickness especially when defects in the early classical complement components prevent effective clearance (cf. p. 265).
In SLE, complexes of DNA and other nuclear antigens, together with immunoglobulin and complement, can be detected by immunofluorescent staining of kidney biopsies from patients with evidence of renal dysfunction.
The staining pattern with a fluorescent anti xxx or anti xxx is punctate or 'lumpy-bumpy' as some would describe it (figure 12.13b) in marked contrast with the linear pattern caused by the xxx antibodies in Goodpasture's syndrome (figure 12.13a; p. 264).
The complexes grow in size to become large aggregates visible in the electron microscope as amorphous humps on the epithelial side of the glomerular basement membrane (figure 15.5).
During the active phase of the disease, serum complement levels fall as components are affected by immune aggregates in the kidney and circulation.

Attempts to detect autoantigens in the circulating complexes have not been conspicuously successful; immunoglobulins and complement components make up the usual tally of constituents which can be identified.

Although in a way negative evidence, this is consistent with the possibility that anti-idiotype may perpetuate an autoimmune state once it is initiated (i.e. acts as a surrogate autoantigen) and generate circulating idiotype - anti-idiotype complexes.

Immunofluorescent studies on skin biopsies from patients with the related disease discoid lupus erythematosus also reveal the presence of immune complexes.

Rheumatoid arthritis 

Morphological evidence for immunological activity 

The joint changes in rheumatoid arthritis are in essence produced by the malign growth of the synovial cells as a pannus overlaying and destroying cartilage and bone (figure 15.6a-f).
The synovial membrane which surrounds and maintains the joint space becomes intensely cellular as a result of considerable immunological hyper-reactivity as evidenced by large numbers of T-cells, mostly CD4, in various stages of activation, usually associated with dendritic cells and macrophages; clumps of plasma cells are frequently observed and sometimes even secondary follicles with germinal centres are present as though the synovium had become an active Lymph node (figure 15.6g, h and i).
Indeed it has been estimated that the synthesis of immunoglobulins by the synovial tissue ranks with that of a stimulated Lymph node.
There is widespread expression of surface HLA-DR (class II); T- and B-cells, dendritic and synovial lining cells and macrophages are all positive, indicative of some pretty lively action (figure 15.6k).
The thesis is that this fiery immunological reactivity provides an intense stimulus to the synovial lining cells which undergo a Dr Jeckyll to Mr Hyde transformation into the invasive pannus which brings about joint erosion through the release of destructive mediators.

What is provoking this immunological activity? 

From the T-cell standpoint, no conventional antigens have yet been identified.
There are currently reports of the isolation of T-cell lines from the joint which are driven by EB virus transformed B-cell lines derived from the same Lymphocyte populations.
This suggest perhaps four main possibilities for the T-cell-line specificities: anti-B-cell idiotype, and anti-self class II MHC either alone or associated with processed EBV protein or stress (heat shock) proteins.

Synthesis of the latter increases in response to external 'insults' such as a rise in temperature, viral infection, cytokine stimulation, or may be even shear forces in joints which are active.
Although it should not be too difficult to sort out this matter, at the time of writing I do not have the required data.
For argument's sake let me plump for the possibility that there are significant numbers of T-cells which react with autologous class II determinants bearing peptides derived from stress proteins.
The reader should be warned that the disproportionate amount of space devoted to the next few sections reflects the author's idiosyncratic view of the subject.

xxx autosensitization 

By utilizing the mechanism set out in figure 14.12 (p. 320), these T-cells could stimulate joint B-lymphocytes expressing stress protein peptides which have reacted with autoantigens bearing repeating determinants; in particular, in the context of rheumatoid arthritis, these might be the multiple Fc regions of xxx within a soluble immune complex.
This would lead to the synthesis of autoantibodies to the xxx Fc region, known as antiglobulins or rheumatoid factors.
These are the hallmark of the disease, being demonstrable in virtually all patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
The majority have xxx antiglobulins which react in the classical latex and sheep cell agglutination tests (table 14.2; note 7) and both they and the 'seronegative' patients who fail to react in these tests can be shown to have elevated levels of xxx antiglobulins detectable by solid phase immunoassay (cf. p. 94; figure 15.7).

Figure 15.5

Renal biopsy of SLE patient with severe immune complex glomerulonephritis and proteinuria.

Electron micrograph showing irregular thickening of glomerular capillary walls by subepithelial complexes (a) and subendothelial complexes (b).
The mesangial region shows abundant (probably phagocytosed) complexes.
(Courtesy of Dr A Leatham).

If, therefore, autosensitization to xxx is an almost universal feature of the disease, most of the plasma cells in the synovium should be synthesizing antiglobulins.
But in fact only a relative minority of the plasma cells (say 10 - 20%) bind fluoresceinated xxx , either in the form of heat-aggregated material (figure 15.6j) or immune complexes (rheumatoid factor is a low affinity antibody and good binding is only seen when multivalent xxx is used as antigen).
However, we must take into account a strange and unique feature of xxx antiglobulins; because they are both antigen and antibody at the same time, they are capable of self-association (figure 15.8b) and this hides the majority of free antiglobulin valencies.

Cleverly realizing that destruction of the Fc regions by pepsin would liberate these hidden binding sites (figure 15.8c), Munthe & Natvig observed that as many as 40 - 70% of the plasma cells in the synovium displayed an anti- xxx specificity following treatment with this enzyme.

xxx aggregates, presumably products of these plasma cells, can be regularly detected in the synovial tissues and in the joint fluid where they give rise to typical acute inflammatory reactions with fluid exudates.
Analysis shows them to consist almost exclusively of immunoglobulins and complement while a major proportion of the xxx is present as self-associated antiglobulin as shown by binding to an xxx immunosorbent after treatment with pepsin.

Abnormal glycosylation 

One of the most recent events in the rheumatoid arthritis saga has been the discovery that the patients' xxx is abnormally glycosylated.
The two xxx domains in the xxx region are held apart (cf. p. 44) by two asparagine-linked sugars of the general structure shown in figure 15.9a.
The 1,3 arms from each sugar provide a bridge between the domains while the 1,6 sugars are directed towards the protein surface where the terminal sialic acid - galactose lies in a special 'lectin-like' pocket (figure 15.9b and c).

Some chains end in N-acetyl-glucosamine and lack the terminal sialic acid-galactose sugars.
In normal individuals, some 14% of the xxx sugar groups lack the terminal galactose on both chains.
What is extraordinary is that the percentage of sugars completely lacking galactose in the xxx of rheumatoid arthritis patients is always higher than in the controls and can go as high as 60% (figure 15.10).
This glycosylation defect could lead to conformational change in the Fc structure with two possible consequences: 

1 the xxx may have increased autoantigenicity, and 2 self-associated xxx complexes (figure 15.8) would be held together more strongly if the terminal sialic acid-galactose on the Fab sugar of one xxx fits into the lectin site on xxx left vacant by the lack of galactose on the xxx sugar.
The glycosylation defect is not seen in SLE but is every bit as abnormal in tuberculosis! 

The production of tissue damage 

As explained in the legend to figure 15.8, the complexes can be stabilized by the multivalent xxx binding molecules, xxx rheumatoid factor and xxx , and when present in the joint space they may initiate an Arthus reaction leading to an influx of polymorphs with which they react to release Lysosomal enzymes.
These include neutral proteinases and collagenase which can damage the articular cartilage by breaking down proteoglycans and collagen fibrils.
More damage results if the complexes are adherent to the cartilage since the polymorph binds but is unable to internalize them ('frustrated phagocytosis'); as a result the Lysosomal hydrolases are released extracellularly into the space between the cell and the cartilage where they are protected from enzyme inhibitors such as xxx macroglobulin.

The aggregates may also stimulate the macrophage-like cells of the synovial lining, either directly through their surface receptors or indirectly through phagocytosis and resistance to intracellular digestion.
The release of lymphokines such as xxx and xxx from activated T-cells provides further potent macrophage stimulators.

The activated synovial cells grow out as a malign pannus (cover) over the cartilage (figure 15.7d) and at the margin of this advancing granulation tissue breakdown can be seen (figure 15.7e), almost certainly as a result of the release of enzymes, reactive oxygen intermediates and especially of interleukin-1, xxx and xxx .
Activated macrophages also secrete plasminogen activator and the plasmin formed as a consequence activates a latent collagenase produced by synovial cells.
Sensitization to partially degraded collagen may occur and this could lead secondarily to amplification of the lesion.
The secreted products of the stimulated macrophage, can activate chondrocytes to exacerbate cartilage breakdown, and osteoclasts to bring about bone resorption which is a further complication of severe disease.
Subcutaneous nodules are granulomata (figure 15.6m and n) possibly formed through local production of insolubilized self-associating antiglobulins.

The rheumatological pulse quickened perceptibly a few years ago with the discovery that a high proportion of patients with rheumatoid arthritis have elevated titres of circulating antibodies to a nuclear antigen present in EB virus transformed but absent from normal Lymphocytes.
This led to the finding that the T-cells in these patients are deficient in the xxx interferon-mediated control of EB virus transformation of B-lymphocytes.
Although it is unlikely that this signifies a primary aetiological role for EB virus infection, it could represent a basic regulatory abnormality which results in defective handling of some initiating micro-organism and possibly allows the emergence of the autoreactive T-cells.
An overview of the pathogenesis of the disease and speculation on its aetiology are presented in figure 15.11, but it should be emphasized that there are many other conceivable hypotheses, including cross-reactions between microbes and xxx and generation of T-helper anti xxx , to account for the development of xxx autosensitization.

Figure 15.6

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

(a) Hands of a patient with chronic RA showing classical swan-neck deformities.
(b) Diagrammatic representation of a diarthrodial joint showing bone and cartilagenous erosions beneath the synovial membrane derived pannus.
(c) Proximal interphalangeal joint depicting marked bony erosion and marginal erosion of the cartilage. 
(d) Early pannus of granulation tissue growing over the patella.
(e) Histology of pannus showing clear erosion of bone and cartilage at the cellular margin. 
(f) Histology of the pannus stained for macrophage non-specific esterase; note long stained dendritic processes. 
(g) Chronic inflammatory cells in the deeper layers of the synovium in RA.
(h) A hypervillous synovium with well-formed secondary follicles with germinal centres (relatively rare occurrence).
(i) A high power view of an area of diseased synovium showing collections of classical plasma cells. 
(j) Plasma cells isolated from a patient's synovial tissue stained simultaneously for xxx (with fluorescein-labelled xxx ) and rheumatoid factor (with rhodamine labelled aggregated xxx ).
Two of the four xxx positive plasma cells appear to be synthesizing rheumatoid factors.
(k) Rheumatoid synovium showing large numbers of cells stained by anti-HLA-DR (anti-class II).
(l) Rheumatoid synovium showing class II positive accessory cells (green) in intimate contact with xxx positive T-cells (orange). 
(m) Large rheumatoid nodules on the forearm. 
(n) Granulomatous appearance of the rheumatoid nodule with central necrotic area surrounded by epithelioid cells, macrophages and scattered Lymphocytes.
Plasma cells making rheumatoid factor are often demonstrable and the lesion probably represents a response to the formation of insoluble anti xxx complexes.
((a) kindly given by Dr D Isenberg, (c), (d), (e), (g), (h) and (i) by Dr LE Glynn, (f) by Dr J Edwards, (j) by Drs P Youinou and P Lydyard and (k) and (1) by Prof G Janossy).

Figure 15.7

xxx and xxx antiglobulins determined by tube radioassay in patients with seropositive and seronegative rheumatoid arthritis.

The doffed lines indicate the 95% confidence limits (mean + 2 SD) of the normal group.
(From Nineham L, Hay FC '&' Roitt IM (1976) J Clin Path 29, 1121).

Figure 15.8

Self-associated complexes of xxx antiglobulins and the exposure of 'hidden' binding sites by pepsin.

Although of relatively low affinity, the strength of binding is boosted by the 'bonus effect' of the mutual attachment and, furthermore, such complexes in the joint may be stabilised by xxx antiglobulin and xxx which have polyvalent binding sites for xxx .

Systemic vasculitis 

Traditionally, these disorders have been linked with an immune complex mediated pathogenesis but the true factors causing vascular damage remain elusive.
They are frequently associated with the presence of circulating antibodies to components of the polymorph primary granule, a serine protease III in the case of Wegener's granulomatosis and myeloperoxidase in some patients with polyarteritis nodosa.

Figure 15.9

The Fc sugars and their role in bridging the two xxx domains.

(a) Typical structure of each N-linked sugar.
Some chains lack terminal galactose-sialic acid. 
(b) Position of sugar chains in xxx domains.
(c) Structure of the xxx regions and the association between the terminal galactosesialic acid on the 1,6 arm and the protein surface.
The 1,3 arms, one of which must lack galactose, bridge the two domains. 
( xxx , N-acetylglucosamine; Man, mannose; Gal, galactose; xxx , sialic acid; Fuc, fucose).

Cellular hypersensitivity 

The inflammatory infiltrate in organ-specific autoimmune disease such as thyroidifis, pernicious anaemia and type I diabetes is usually essentially mononuclear in character and, although not an infallible guide, this has been taken as an expression of cell-mediated hypersensitivity.
Firm evidence for a direct participation of T-lymphocytes in any of these reactions has yet to be provided although the recent demonstration of the expression of class II molecules on cells in affected organs and the presence of antigen-specific T-cells would accord with an involvement of these cells.
So would the beneficial effect of cyclosporin A in early insulindependent diabetes at levels which have little effect on antibody production, since this agent targets so specifically on T-cell Lymphokine synthesis.
As we shall see, pathogenic T-cells play a primary role in many of the animal models of organspecific autoimmune disease, encouraging the view that comparable processes are implicated in the corresponding human disorders.

Indirect evidence for a destructive role of the inflammatory cells comes from the observation that high doses of steroids may restore gastric function in certain patients with pernicious anaemia.
In one such case studied, biopsy after intensive treatment with prednisone showed a diminution in the cellular infiltrate and new formation of parietal and chief cells in the gastric mucosa; acid and intrinsic factor were now produced after histamine stimulation and the ability to absorb vitamin B12 assessed by the Schilling test was restored to near normal values.
The most likely explanation is that attack by the inflammatory cells and attempts to regenerate by mucosal cells were more or less in balance in the atrophic mucosa.
Elimination of inflammatory cells by the prednisone allowed the regeneration of gastric mucosal cells to become dominant.

Our views on the pathogenesis of pernicious anaemia may be stated as follows.
Autoimmune attack based on the parietal cell antigen gives rise to an atrophic gastritis which in many cases settles down to a dynamic equilibrium where the rate of destruction roughly balances the rate of regeneration; the loss of capacity to make intrinsic factor is evident in tests showing defective B~2 absorption but sufficient vitamin is absorbed to keep the body in balance.
These patients often have parietal cell antibodies and go on for 15 years or so without developing megaloblastic anaemia.

However, if they should produce antibodies to intrinsic factor in the lumen of the gastro-intestinal tract, these will neutralize the small amount of intrinsic factor still available and the body will move into negative balance for B12.
The symptoms of B12 deficiency will then appear some considerable time later as the liver stores become exhausted (figure 15.12).
A similar long latent period before the onset of clinical disease is evident in the prospective study of a family with insulin-dependent diabetes documented in figure 14.4 (p. 311) where complement fixing islet-cell antibodies were detected two years before overt signs of pancreatic deficiency were apparent.
Note also that the disease occurs after the autoimmunity pointing yet again to a primary pathogenetic role for the immune process.

One also cannot ignore the possibility of ADCC mechanisms.
For example, the destruction of isolated liver cells by leucocytes from patients with xxx negative active chronic hepatitis can be blocked by antigen (hepatic lipoprotein) or by aggregated normal xxx (which would bind to K-cell Fc receptors), but is not affected by removal of T-cells.

The nature of the cellular attack in organ-specific disorders is still not resolved but it is not improbable that cell-mediated hypersensitivity, antibodymediated cytotoxicity and inflammatory reactions due to immune complexes may operate alone or in concert.

Figure 15.10

Plots of the percentage of xxx sugars which completely lack terminal galactose showing the abnormal glycosylation of xxx in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 

The shaded area indicates the mean + S.D. of the normal controls.
There is preliminary evidence that the defect is less marked when the disease is inactive. 
(Data from Parekh RB, Isenberg DA, Rook GAW, Roitt I M, Dwek RA and Rademacher T W (1989) J Autoimmunity, 2, 101).
