
DNA: MODELS AND MEANING

Through observation, experimentation, and inspired speculation, what at first were vague and inchoate notions of the gene became increasingly more finely focused.
Still, despite accurate conclusions being drawn about the gene -its location in the chromosome and its key role in the life of the cell and in heredity- the molecular architecture and exact function of the gene remained mysteries until halfway through the twentieth century.
In our telling of the tale of the penetration of those mysteries we need to introduce some technical details here.
These details center around the DNA molecule and its activities within the cell.

In fact, these are the technicalities that one must grasp in order to understand the current interpretation of the human genome.
They must be understood to appreciate, beyond simple generalities, how the growing information about the genome can first be interpreted meaningfully and then applied to manipulate genes for scientific and medical purposes.
Such an understanding has become a common denominator among biologists.
It must be as well for all others who want to have an informed insight into how and why the knowledge derived from this analysis will have such a profound impact on not only human but on all living systems.

With the work of Watson and his colleagues, a golden age of molecular biology would begin.
New technologies would be spawned to carry forth the expansion of knowledge about the functions of the gene.
The Human Genome Project has become possible only because of this array of developments.
Its tools and methodologies are in great measure those initiated in the 1950s through the 1970s.
The new era began with what is considered to be the most significant synthesis in the biological sciences since the work of Charles Darwin.
We refer to the story of the «double helix».

James Dewey Watson was always bright.
He had been one of the original «Quiz Kids» on the wartime radio program and had entered the University of Chicago at the age of 15.
Although he could not have known it at the time, the University was then the site of the world's first «atomic pile».
As part of the Manhattan Project the top secret «pile» was a gigantic stack of graphite blocks enclosing rods of uranium.
The clandestine pile, unknown even to the president of the University, had been assembled under the stands of the unused football stadium.

On December 2, 1942, under the watchful eye of Enrico Fermi, designer of the pile, cadmium control rods were carefully withdrawn and the highly radioactive uranium produced the first controlled atomic chain reaction.
It ran for only 4.5 minutes at one-half watt but would lead to the technology that made possible the development of the atomic bomb only three years later.
Among the small group of scientists present on that historical day was Leo Szilard, a Hungarian theoretical physicist and one of the bomb's principal architects.
In 1947 Szilard, who had vigorously opposed the use of the bomb, left physics for biology.
He went to Cold Spring Harbor to join the «phage group» of Luria and Delbrück.

Watson's interest, however, had always been in biology. 
He obtained his degree in 1946, staying on an additional year to take courses in zoology.
In 1944 he chanced to read the newly published book by Erwin Schrodinger, What Is Life? 
The book had been inspired by a brief paper written by Max Delbrück on the theoretical physical properties of the gene.
Schrodinger speculated further on the nature of the gene in light of the established principles of chemistry and physics.
The book's theme is that genes are the key components in living cells and that to understand what life is one must know how genes act.
Watson at once «became polarized towards finding out the secret of the gene».

When Watson arrived at the graduate school of Indiana University in 1947, its most prominent faculty member was Herman Muller, who had just won the Nobel prize after his work with X-ray-induced mutations.

Although drawn to Indiana by Muller's presence, Watson was most influenced there by Salvadore Luria and through him by Max Delbrück and the «phage group».
Both Luria and Delbrück had fled Europe as war drew nearer, Luria from Italy and Delbrück from Germany.
Luria assigned Watson to a research project on the effects of X rays on phages and the latter completed his Ph.D. in May 1950 at the age of 22.
After a last six weeks at Cold Spring Harbor he sailed for Europe.

His experience in Herman Kalckar's lab quickly turned out to be a disaster.
Watson's indifference to nucleic acid chemistry was not cured by the romance of being in Europe.
He became increasingly frustrated by the growing realization that remaining in Copenhagen with Kalckar would not get him any closer to the nature of the gene.

Then, while attending a conference in Naples, his fortunes changed Among the speakers was Maurice Wilkins from King's College, London.

Wilkins reviewed his preliminary data on the molecular structure of DNA that he had obtained by the use of X-ray crystallography. 
Basically, this technique, involves exposing molecules in a crystalline form to X rays.

Some of these rays strike the atoms and are deflected from the crystalline substance.
A rotation of the crystal changes the angles at which the X rays strike it and the image of the deflected rays can be captured on film.

This «diffraction» pattern can convey information about the three- dimensional configuration of the atoms making up the molecule.

The technique is precise and demands skilled interpretation for peering at molecules in a way that nothing else can.
Watson had worried that the structure of genes might be frustratingly irregular.
Now he knew that they could crystallize, that is, they must have a regular structure that might be analyzed in a systematic way.
As Wilkins spoke, Watson decided to join him in working on DNA in England.

Wilkins, a New Zealand physicist, had come to the United States during World War II to work on uranium separation for the Manhattan Project.
He soon turned away from the study of the atomic nucleus to work on the nucleus of the cell, another of the number of physicists who had decided to turn their skills to understanding biological problems.

Watson, unable to angle an invitation to work directly with Wilkins, nevertheless managed through Luria's efforts to obtain an invitation to join Max Perutz's group at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge University, near King's College.

At that time a concerted effort headed by Perutz was underway to analyze large biological molecules.
His group was particularly interested in X-ray crystallography of the hemoglobin protein. 
The Cavendish was then headed by Sir Lawrence Bragg, one of the inventors of crystallography.
It had been the site of the first atom smasher and Ernest Rutherford's original accelerator was still there.
Now the Cavendish would be the scene of yet another extraordinary scientific revolution. 
Rutherford had already unleashed the awesome power locked within the atom.
Finally the time had arrived to break open the gene's mysteries to release its potential.

As the inheritor of a past in which Americans dropped nuclear bombs, we can know too well what destruction that triumph of physics wrought on our fellow humans.
Physics has also enabled us to glean deep insights into the nature of the universe and of matter.
These insights led to extraordinary developments such as computers, supersonic aircraft, rockets, and lasers. 
These advances, though in themselves morally neutral, can be used either for wise or destructive purposes.

Similarly a new frontier in molecular biology is upon us. 
We are only now approaching through the Human Genome Project and all of the research that it will inspire an intimate understanding of our genes.
This will bring with it a power over human life which must be used wisely.

There is much more to be said on this theme in later chapters, so let us return to the drama at hand: the revolutionary discovery of the structure and essence of the gene.

During Watson's first day at Cambridge he met the ebullient Francis Crick and the two hit it off immediately.
Not only did they have similar interests but, as Crick would write in his 1988 retrospective What Mad Pursuit , «(we had) a certain youthful arrogance, a ruthlessness, and an impatience with sloppy thinking (that) came naturally to both of us».
For his part, Watson began his best-selling 1968 book The Double Helix with this sentence, «I have never seen Francis Crick in a modest mood». 

At that time Francis Crick was 35 years old and was still a graduate student.
He was another convert from physics and had joined Perutz at the Cavendish to work on protein structure. 
Like Watson, Crick had decided early on that only a detailed molecular analysis of DNA would uncover the true nature of the gene.
They soon agreed upon a collaboration based on Crick's contributing his knowledge of X-ray crystallography and physics to Watson's familiarity with genetics.

As talented enthusiasts but virtual unknowns in the world of science they had a formidable competitor.
Linus Pauling, professor at Cal Tech, was considered the world's leading chemist. 
He was the author of the classic bock The Nature of the Chemical Bond , and had only recently described the first protein structure analyzed by X-ray crystallography, calling it an «alpha helix».
By this he meant that the particular protein molecule under study existed in a helical shape, that is, a configuration with a constant diameter throughout its length such as a strand of wire would make if it were wrapped around a cylinder.

Pauling's insistence that knowledge of the chemistry of the atoms and bonds of the large molecules of living systems would be sufficient to lay bare the mysteries of living systems had already been an inspiration to both Watson and Crick.
It appeared to be only a matter of time before the great Pauling would discover the exact shape of the DNA molecule.
With the brashness of youth they determined to beat Pauling at his own game.

To add to their frustration, the work on the DNA molecule at Cambridge now was centered in Maurice Wilkin's laboratory at King's College.
In 1950 Sir John Randall, head of the biophysics section at King's, had invited Rosalind Franklin, then working in Paris and a specialist in X-ray analysis of molecules, to come to King's College and set up an X-ray diffraction unit. 
Wilkins had already done some X-ray analysis of DNA but, knowing he did not have the background to go much further, he had agreed that Randall should hire her to pick up where he had left off.
The story of Rosalind Franklin is a complex and dark chapter in the DNA story.

Rosalind Franklin, a bright, analytical, and independent 30-year-old woman, was generally perceived as something of an anomaly in the male club atmosphere of King's College.
Shortly after she arrived she began working under the perfectly logical impression that DNA was now her province.
She was soon openly annoyed at what she perceived as Wilkins's treatment of her as an assistant rather than as a colleague.
The two, as Wilkins so discreetly put it, «never hit it off». 
The relationship between Wilkins and Franklin and the attendant difficulties that she had to face are carefully and thoughtfully documented in Anne Sayre's book Rosalind Franklin and DNA .
Arthur Cooper of Newsweek said of her book in his review, «Anyone who read 'The Double Helix' owes it to Franklin to read her story too».

Watson's best-seller The Double Helix , first published in 1968, is a textbook example of male chauvinism. 
He referred to Franklin as «Rosy» and wondered «how she would look if she took off her glasses and did something novel with her hair».
The epilogue of his book admits that his initial impressions of her «were often wrong» and realized «years too late the struggles that the intelligent woman faces».

Francis Crick, in his retrospective of those years, What Mad Pursuit , aproached the subject somewhat differently. 
He noted that there were «irritating restrictions -she was not allowed to have coffee in one of the faculty rooms reserved for men only- but these were mainly trivial, or so they seemed to be at the time».
One cannot imagine their being trivial to the excluded party.

Deprived of any official opportunity to tackle the problem of DNA structure Watson and Crick nevertheless proceeded to emulate Pauling's work on proteins by puzzling over the following question. 
Based on what they could learn from the X-ray data already gathered by Wilkins and Franklin, they asked themselves which atoms in the DNA molecule were most likely to sit next to which others?
All they had to do, according to Watson, with the self-assuredness of hindsight, was to «construct a set of molecular models and begin to play».

In the early 1940s scientists had mistakenly thought that DNA was a small and relatively simple molecule.
The leading expert on nucleic acids in the 1920s had been Phoebus Levine of the Rockefeller Institute.
He had described the DNA molecule as a regularly repeating series of building blocks called nucleotides, each made of a sugar, phosphate, and nitrogenous base in which the four different types of nucleotides followed one another in fixed order in repeated sets of four.
This would form a polymer, a long chain made of many individual building blocks.
The «tetranucleotide hypothesis», as it was called, left little room for variation in the DNA molecule. 
This strengthened the case for proteins as the genetic material.

Proteins were known to be definite polymers, whose building blocks were amino acids.
These acids are joined to one another like pearls on a string.
Twenty different types of amino acids are known to occur commonly in living systems. 
Unlike the hypothetical monotonous sets of four nucleotide types repeated again and again in nucleic acids, a proteir1 would have many more possibilities for variability.
That is because the 20 amino acids could be arranged in literally millions of different sequences.

A protein actually consists of one or more individual chains, «polypeptides», usually made up of several hundred amino acids.
The polypeptide chains are linked to each other by chemical bonds and the whole complex is contorted into either a roughly spherical or elongated threadlike shape.

X-ray analysis of numerous proteins had shown that each particular protein has a specific unvarying shape particular to that protein type.
If heated, some of the protein bonds break apart.
The protein literally unfolds, losing its normal precise shape.
This is known as «denaturing» the protein.
A familiar example of this occurs when egg white, which consists of the protein albumin, is heated.
This denaturing changes the egg white from a liquid to a solid form, reflecting the change in the shape in the albumin molecules. 

Since scientists found that denatured proteins no longer could function as enzymes, they conjectured that the function of a protein depends on its exact three-dimensional structure. 
Therefore, if genes were made out of protein, it seemed logical that each gene would have its own unique, three-dimensional organization, just as enzymes did.
How could such a complicated structure possibly function as a gene?
How could it somehow synthesize other differently shaped proteins to be used as enzymes? 
For that matter, how could that kind of complex gene copy itself generation after generation with few mistakes?

By the late 1940s several important discoveries clarifying the chemistry of DNA had been made.
Scientists had established that DNA molecules were actually quite long and certainly more complex than the unvarying sequence described by Levine.

The nucleotide building blocks of DNA each consisted of a sugar (deoxyribose), a phosphate group, and one of four different complex organic molecules termed nitrogenous bases.

Although it is difficult to visualize, we need to understand that molecules take up space in all dimensions.
They have specific shapes with constituent atoms attached to each other at a variety of angles.
Physical chemists specialize in studying these configurations and have literally worked out three-dimensional scale models for a number of molecules.

The internal forces holding molecules together follow certain well-defined physical laws which impose strict constraints on the shape of that molecule.

This means, for example, that a molecule of water or a molecule of glucose can only assume a certain specific shape. 
However, even if one has a complete analysis of all of the various parts of a highly complex molecule, there are still numerous possible configurations which might seem reasonable to anyone attempting to build a three-dimensional model of that molecule.
Given the parts of an automobile transmission, how many ways could they be put together before the engine would operate as designed?
Regardless of the possibilities, only one arrangement would be the correct one.

Irwin Chargaff, an Austrian refugee and later a chemist at Columbia University, had made a puzzling discovery in the late 1940s.
He found that the composition of DNA from different organisms was quite similar in certain respects.
Two of the four nitrogenous base components of DNA, the so-called purines adenine (A) and guanine (G), were made up of two attached rings of atoms, one five-sided and the other six-sided.
The rings were made up of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. 
The other two bases were the pyrimidines cytosine (C) and thymine (T), both six-sided rings.
Moreover, Chargaff ascertained that the amount of adenine in a given DNA sample always equaled the amount of thymine.

Likewise, the amount of guanine equaled that of cytosine. 
However, there was a critical difference among the DNA isolated from different species of organisms.
Although the amount of A equaled that of T and G that of C, the relative amounts of A + T and G + C varied widely.
There was no obvious explanation.

The nitrogenous bases, with their relative amounts conforming to what became known as Chargaff's rules, were known to be attached to a long chain of alternating deoxyribose sugar and phosphate groups.
One of the four possible nitrogenous bases was bonded to each deoxyribose.
A nucleotide consisted of a deoxyribose sugar, phosphate, and nitrogenous base combination. 

Watson and Crick could see that the solution to the DNA puzzlc was hound to be trickier than that of the alpha helix dcscribed by Linus Pauling.
In the alpha helix, a single row of attached amino acids coiled up into a helix.
The shape was kept intact by «hydrogen bonds» linking together nearby coils of the helical chain.
A hydrogen bond forms when a hydrogen atom bound to a negatively charged atom is attracted to another negative atom.
In a living cell, these negatively charged atoms are usually oxygen and nitrogen. 
One hydrogen bond is relatively weak and easily broken but in the case of proteins and other complex molecules there may be many of these bonds and the total attractive force is thus much stronger.

Wilkins's early X-ray data had indicated that the DNA molecule was wider than would be the case if it consisted of only one nucleotide chain.
That had led him to the conclusion that DNA was perhaps a compound helix composed of several nucleotide chains wrapped around each other.
The chains might be held together by hydrogen bonds or possibly bonds between the phosphate groups.

Watson and Crick began with the assumption that the nucleotides were made up of a «sugar-phosphate backbone», a long unbranched chain of alternating deoxyribose and phosphates.
The deoxyribose units of the «backbone» each bore an attached nitrogenous base.
The sequence of the nitrogenous bases, each one attached to a molecule of deoxyribose, was assumed to be quite irregular.
If the sequence of bases was regular, such as ATGCATGCATGC, then the DNA molecule would be a homogeneous series of nucleotides with nothing to distinguish one gene (whatever that was) from the next.
On the other hand, if the order of the bases was irregular, such as AATGCTACT, then this kind of base arrangement could supply incredible variability to the DNA molecule.

What were needed were more definitive X-ray photographs. 
Rosalind Franklin was scheduled to give a talk on her past-six-months' work and Watson and Crick's attention turned to her latest findings.
Watson, who attended the talk with Maurice Wilkins, detailed her remarks to Crick, who seized upon the fact that her current X-ray pictures had been made using hydrated DNA.
That meant that the DNA was in the so-called B-form, a descriptive term coined by Franklin, which contained many molecules of water and was thus more fiberlike in nature than the highly crystalline form previously seen by Wilkins. 
The problem with the presence of so much water was that the clarity of the resulting pictures was poor, making it difficult to interpret.
Using Watson's recollection of the amount of water in her samples, Crick determined that DNA could be composed of two, three, or four nucleotide strands.
It was «merely» a question of the way in which those strands twisted about the axis.

A few days later a three-membered helix model had been construtted using sheet metal figures cut in the shape and size of the constituent atoms, with wire, nuts, and bolts to hold them together.
The nitrogenous bases faced outward and the helix was held together at the center by bonds between the phosphate groups.
Proudly showing their construction to Wilkins and Franklin for their approval they were devastated to learn that Watson had misunderstood the amount of water in her sample by a factor of 10.

To make matters worse, the growing tension caused by the proprietary interest that King's College had in DNA and the unofficial efforts with the same by Watson and Crick resulted in official word from above.
Sir Lawrence Bragg indicated in no uncertain terms that they would henceforth leave the DNA problem alone. 
Watson, with his characteristic bravura, wrote about this moratorium, «Lying low made sense because we were up the creek with models based on sugar and phosphate cores». 
Their active model building was brought to a halt but their conversations and speculations continued unabated.

Meanwhile, Watson had received a long letter from Alfred Hershey at Cold Spring Harbor filled with exciting news about Hershey's latest experiments.
He and Martha Chase had established that the key feature of infection of bacteria by viruses was the injection of DNA from the virus into the bacterium. 
The DNA took over the operations of the bacterial cell, directing it to make new viruses.
This was a powerful proof that DNA was the prime genetic material.
Not long afterward a chemist from the States stopped by the Cavendish for a brief visit.
Erwin Chargaff, now one of the world's experts on DNA chemistry, was not amused when he met the two unknowns who proclaimed that they had been in on the race to be the first to understand the three-dimensional structure of DNA.
He was doubly taken aback to find that Crick had momentarily forgotten the formulas for the nitrogenous bases.
He left unimpressed but Chargaff's rules now entered their calculations. 
That would prove to he crucial to their success.

One morning a manuscript arrived from the renowned Linus Pauling detailing his conclusions about DNA structure.
It was sent to his son Peter who was at that time, ironically, an office mate of Crick and Watson.
Their dismay turned to disbelief as they poured over the report and saw that Pauling had made a fundamental error in chemistry.
Chemists had long ago established that the phosphate groups of the nucleotides ionized, that is, they released hydrogen into their surroundings. 
This property of being a «hydrogen donor» made the DNA molecule an acid.
Incredibly, Pauling had drawn the phosphate group in the three- membered helix with the hydrogens still attached.
The race by no means was over. 

Watson rushed to King's College with the Pauling news. 
He burst in on Rosalind Franklin, working alone in her laboratory.
She had long been offended by his continued insistence on lecturing to her on interpreting the X-ray crystallography evidence.
According to Watson's accounts, which are the only records of this encounter, as he waved Pauling's manuscript about in his excitement she became angry.
Her anger was compounded by the fact that the manuscript he had in his hand contained information which she had only a month before requested unsuccessfully from Pauling's lab.

Watson hastily retreated through the open door whereupon Wilkins appeared and bustled him along to his office.
In a spirit of camaraderie, perhaps engendered by their common animosity toward Rosalind Franklin, Wilkins showed Watson a picture of an X-ray pattern, one of two excellent pictures of the B-form of DNA that Franklin had taken ten months earlier.
Watson wrote of the experience, «The instant I saw the picture my mouth fell open and my pulse began to race».

He had the new critical facts that were needed.
The B-form of DNA was a helix which had a regular repeating interval of 34 angstroms distance between each coil.
An angstrom is one ten-billionth of a meter; there are 254 million angstrom units to one inch.
This was precisely 10 times the 3.4 angstrom distance between one nucleotide and the next one above it.
The helix itself was a smooth cylinder 20 angstroms wide.

Watson had already been aware of some of these measurements. 

Whether or not Wilkins discussed the others at that time is still unclear.

The fact remains that he showed Watson the picture without the knowledge of Rosalind Franklin.
She already had deduced that the nitrogenous bases had to be in the center of the helix with the sugar phosphate backbone on the outside.
Her own notes say that «the results suggest a helical structure... containing 2, 3 or 4 co-axial nucleic acid chains per helical unit, and having the phosphate groups near the outside». 
Wilkins had shown Watson the very photograph by Rosalind Franklin that would be crucial to building a correct molecular model.

On hearing of the Pauling fiasco and convinced that Watson and Crick, now armed with their new information, were prepared to complete their synthesis, Bragg gave them renewed permission to resume model building.
Days of frustration followed. 
One month after Watson's viewing of the B-form of DNA in Wilkins's lab a report was passed on to Crick which had been circulated by Sir John Randall.
It contained a report by Rosalind Franklin giving the critical measurements of the B-form but not the photograph.
Crick, with a much deeper understanding than Watson of X-ray crystallography gleaned from her numbers the last piece of the puzzle.

Crick suggested that the sugar-phosphate backbones of the double helix would have to be realigned so that they ran in opposite directions to each other, a so-called antiparallel fashion.
This orientation was necessary in order that the two sides of the helix, joined together by the base pairs, would conform to the known 20-angstrom diameter.

Armed with this new realization, Watson redoubled his efforts. 
The «eureka» moment arrived.
He suddenly realized that an adenine and thymine pair when held tightly by two hydrogen bonds would be identical in size to a guanine and cytosine pair held together by three such bonds.
Chargaff's rules!
If these AT and GC pairs were placed into a double helix model made of two intertwining sugar-phosphate backbones so that the base pairs lay flat, their dimensions would allow precisely ten base pairs to fit into every 34-angstrom complete turn of the helical coils.
In so doing, each flat base pair was not aligned with the one immediately above and below it, but was slightly offset from the next like the stairs in a winding staircase.
Each was rotated 36 degrees with respect to the adjacent pair.
Everything fit.

This pairing fit the configuration of two backbones of sugar phosphate units joined to each other by these pairs of nitrogenous bases.
The double helix was «right-handed». 
If one could look down its longitudinal axis, the two sugar-phosphate backbones would turn counterclockwise as they approached the viewer.
The model was complete.
According to Watson, «It was too pretty not to be true». 

A 900-word article by James Watson and Francis Crick was sent off on April 2, 1953 to the editors of Nature , a leading international science journal.
It began modestly: «We wish to suggest a structure for...
DNA.
This structure has novel features which are of considerable interest».
The navel features« of the molecule would include the gene itself.

«This structure», whose analysis had long been the province of chemists, joined later by X-ray crystallographers, had in the end been uncovered by two creative minds not among their ranks.
They had used neither test tubes, incubators, nor chemicals- only the sheer intellectual power of synthesis. 
A significant part of the data which had entered into their synthesis had been derived by Rosalind Franklin.
She had taken the definitive X-ray photograph, and her calculations were vital in the formation of the final model.
Would she have eventually come up with the answer herself?
Very likely.

However, she would not be chosen to share the glory with Watson, Crick, and Wilkins, who received the Nobel prize in 1962 -not even posthumously.
Rosalind Franklin died of cancer in 1958 at the age of 37.
According to Watson, she «continued working on a high level until a few weeks before her death». 

Figure 1

The double helix of DNA

The two winding lines represent the sugar-phosphatechains Note that their antiparallel arrangement is indicated by a 5' and a 3' at opposite ends.
See Chapter 5 for further details. 

MAPS AND MARKERS

The search for our human genes begins, quite logically, with a map.
Ordinary maps range from those indicating the landmarks of large areas to those more useful, detailed maps which guide the casual visitor to a new destination.

To map accurately the borders, highways, cities, and towns of a state requires that an enormous fund of information be available to the cartographer.
To magnify a city's dimensions into a map of individual streets necessitates even more data.
Chromosome mapping is the process of determining the relative position of genes or other recognizable landmarks on chromosomes, and requires information gleaned from both traditional genetics and molecular biology.

If one begins with a reference point such as a prominent building, a good city map will allow one to find a particular street.
The establishment of recognizable landmarks on chromosomes can lead one to the location of specific genes on those chromosomes.
The Human Genome Project has literally set out to develop maps which eventually will lead scientists to the location of every gene on all the human chromosomes (as well as the genes on several nonhuman genomes).

What would be the use of such maps?
Is it really necessary to devote years of effort to attempt to determine the chromosomal sites of genes?
Why not just isolate and study genes as individual units and construct a map later, if possible? 

That sounds logical, but if we continue the map analogy we can see why such an objection, while seemingly plausible, is invalid.
Remember that the human genome is a strand of DNA, 6 feet long in its unwound state, encompassing 50,000 to 100,000 genes.
Just as it would be impossible to locate a particular house on a certain street in an unfamiliar city without the assistance of a map, so too we first need a chromosome map before we can determine even the approximate location of individual genes.

Showing the extraordinary utility of even an incomplete map of the chromosomes, preliminary maps of the human genome already constructed have allowed us to locate the genes linked to a variety of human diseases.
As of August 1990, the relative position of almost 5000 genes had been located.
Among them are the genes responsible for such devastating disorders as hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell anemia, and polycystic kidney disease.

The mapping of these genes has led in some cases to tests that diagnose a disease and allow detailed study of the causative gene that may lead to treatment or cure.
It follows that as the resolution of gene maps increases we will be able to locate most of the thousands of genes that play a role in human disease. 

Granted, a major impetus for gene mapping lies in its potential for improving human health.
In addition, in the area of basic science, detailed understanding of the genome of humans as well as that of other species will deepen our insight into fundamental questions about genome organization, control of gene function, cell growth and development, and evolutionary biology. 
For example, why do our bodies age?
Why are we allotted such a brief span of time before our cells and tissues wear out?
Perhaps the genes will tell us.

Finally, maps are a sine qua non for determining the nitrogenous base sequence of the genome, the code spelling out the directions for life's activities. 
Once that code is obtained in its entirety, according to James Watson «we will be interpreting it a thousand years from now».
By that he means that even knowing the sequence and location of the genes is only the first step. 
It must be followed by the lengthy process of determining the functions and interrelationships of those genes in the life of the human organism.

In order to explain mapping and its role under the aegis of the Human Genome Project, we will need to review briefly the topography and movements of the chromosomes to follow the logic behind mapping protocol.

You will recall that human cells each contain 46 chromosomes except for the sperm cells of the male and the mature egg cells of the female, each of which contains 23.
The 46 chromosomes are actually in 23 pairs.
Only one of these pairs helps to determine the sex of the human.
The sex chromosomes are designated as XX in the female, XY in the male.

One member of each chromosome pair originates from the mail parent (the paternal chromosome) of that individual and the other (the maternal chromosome) from the female parent.
During the life of the cell the two members of each pair do not physically join.
They are referred to as as pairs, not because they are joined or identical, but because they are «homologous».
That means that all along the length of the two chromosomes there are genes governing the same characteristic at the same position (locus) on each chromosome. 
Put simply, if the maternal chromosome has a gene for eye color at locus B, for example, then the paternal chromosome of that pair will also have a gene for eye color at that same position.

As we pointed out in our discussion of basic genetics these gene pairs, also called alleles, are not always identical genes. 
Both genes may be dominant, both may be recessive, or one may be dominant and the other recessive.
You will recall that a recessive gene will ordinarily function only if the other member of the pair is also recessive, while a dominant gene will always function.

During cell division (mitosis), as one cell divides into two, each chromosome is copied, resulting in a total of 92 chromosomes, half of which move on to the new cell.
When certain cells are transformed into sperm cells or egg cells, this doubling of chromosome numbers also takes place but there are two divisions of the cells.
Therefore, from one original cell with 46 chromosomes, four cells (the gametes) are produced, each having 23 chromosomes.
This reduction of chromosome number is critically important as a source of variability in inheritance because each gamete ends up with one of each of the original 23 pairs.
Which one, whether of maternal or paternal origin, is a random event.
Then, when the sperm and egg combine, an entirely unique combination of 46 chromosomes is formed, even though there are still 23 pairs.

Now comes the key to the traditional form of chromosome mapping.
As strange as it may seem, in the early stages of sperm and egg production, the chromosomes actually migrate within the nucleus so that each chromosome pair lines up side by side and the two members of the pair literally wrap around each other.
No one knows what forces lure these partners to each other.
After their tight but brief embrace they separate.
In so doing they often interchange pieces in a process called «crossing over».
Amazingly, the chromosomes actually break and rejoin with pieces from the other member of the pair.
If one chromosome were red and the other white, after crossing over and exchanging pieces both chromosomes would be part red and part white.

This disrupts the original order of the genes of each chromosome. 
We've already pointed out that the genes at the same specific site on both members of a chromosome pair are often different. 
This exchange of pieces between the members of these pairs creates chromosomes with new groups of genes, therefore adding another source of variability in the offspring.
Remember, the child inherits only one member of each of the original 23 pairs of chromosomes.

The concept of the linear arrangement of genes on the chromosomes dates back to Mendel.
However, the first experimental demonstration of crossing-over was performed by Alfred Sturtevant in 1913.
Sturtevant produced the first chromosome map in which he calculated the relative positions of six genes including those for certain body colors and wing sizes on the X chromosome of the fruit fly, Drosophila .
In this organism, as in humans, the female has two X chromosomes and the males have one X and one Y chromosome.

The kind of mapping which Sturtevant initiated and which is still being done today, albeit with more highly sophisticated techniques, is «genetic linkage» mapping.
This type of map shows the arrangement of genes or other recognizable segments of DNA called «markers» along the chromosome. 
This map is constructed by taking advantage of the phenomenon of crossing-over.
That simply means that if two genes, which we'll call A and B, are close together on the same chromosome, they ordinarily are inherited together.
The only way that this would not happen is if that chromosome were to cross over with the other member of its pair, in this case at a point somewhere between A and B. 
Those two genes would then end up on separate chromosomes.

It stands to reason that the farther apart two genes are on a chromosome, the greater the chances that crossing-over can occur between them.
If one can determine the frequency of crossing-over, one can put together a map which will indicate the relative positions of genes on a chromosome.
Using such a map one cannot say «gene A is on this exact site on the chromosome».
One can only say «Gene A is located far away from gene B but close to gene C, etcetera». 

Since only one member of a chromosome pair normally ends up in a sperm or egg cell, then A and B will not be inherited together if crossing-over has occurred between them.
Suppose that there is a way to detect the presence of A and B.
One could look for these genes in the children, parents, or even the grandparents and trace the pattern of crossing-over in these generations. 
If this is done with a number of genes, then one ends up with a genetic linkage map.
The distances between genes on a typical human genetic map are long.
They average about ten million nitrogenous base pairs in length, which is roughly 5% of the size of a chromosome.

A limitation of genetic mapping is the need to trace specific genes or other DNA segments within several generations of a human family.
Despite such difficulties, it was precisely the development of genetic mapping tools, made possible by the advent of molecular biology, that led to the feasibility of even contemplating the Human Genome Project.

In 1980, David Botstein of the California Institute of Technology pointed out that it might be possible to construct a complete linkage map of the human genome using restriction enzymes to cut up the chromosomes into patterns whose inheritance could be followed within families.

By 1987, when a partial map had already helped to narrow the search for several major diseases related to genes, the National Research Council (NRC) committee of the National Institutes of Health called for an immediate effort to develop a genetic linkage map as a goal of a concerted genome project.

Several members of the committee began with serious reservations about the usefulness of a special initiative in « genomics » a term coined in 1986 by Thomas Roderick of the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine to refer to the mapping, sequencing, and other processes of analysis of complex genomes.
The term has survived in the title of the journal, Genomics, an international journal of gene mapping and sequencing, emphasizing analyses of human and other complex genomes.
Despite the early doubts, the concept of a large-scale effort to create a complete map and sequence of the human genome within 15 years also survived as a unanimous recommendation.

The NRC committee recommended that researchers map first and sequence later for two reasons.
First of all, rapid advances in mapping were anticipated because of new molecular techniques, while sequencing would require improvements in technology anticipated but not yet available.
Second, having a map is essential to efficient sequencing.

The committee also recommended that technological developments should be stressed at the outset.
Existing methods of mapping and sequencing were not sufficient to reach the announced goals in the proposed 15-year period.
Also, they suggested that model nonhuman organisms be studied because of the value of such information for the analysis and understanding of the human genome.

A subsequent report from the Office of Technology Assessment in 1988 repeated the original recommendations regarding the mapping and sequencing of the genomes of human and other organisms.
In an effort to curtail criticisms that the undertaking was too massive and unprecedented an effort they stated that «there is no single human genome project but instead many projects». 

As it turned out, the attempt to portray this undertaking as a complex of diffuse but parallel series of programs was short-lived. 
As organizational meetings among the departments, agencies, and leading individuals proliferated, a consensus developed which is expressed succinctly in the title of the DOE/NIH five-year plan, released in February 1990.
It reads, «Understanding Our Genetic Inheritance-the U.S. Human Genome Project: The First Five Years, Fiscal Year 1991-1995».
According to the document, «a centrally coordinated project focused on specific objectives is believed to be the most efficient and least expensive way» to achieve the mapping and sequencing objectives.

Congress received these recommendations in February 1990 in response to its request for a report describing a comprehensive spending plan and optimal strategy for mapping and sequencing the human genome.
In terms of mapping, the recommendations had become more specific.
The goals, in language which we will decipher shortly, are stated as follows:

1. Complete a fully connected human genetic map with markers spaced an average of two to five centimorgans apart.
Identify each marker by an STS.

2. Assemble STS maps of all human chromosomes with the goal of having markers spaced at approximately one hundred thousand [nitrogenous] base pair intervals.

3. Generate overlapping sets of cloned DNA or closely spaced unambiguously ordered markers with continuity over lengths of two million base pairs for large parts of the human genome. 


What are the meanings of these new terms, centimorgans and STS?
How are these ambitious goals to be met?
We need to look a bit more closely at mapping to answer these questions.

Goal one refers to the construction of a detailed genetic linkage map.
As we have explained, such a map uses the frequency of crossing- over as a measure of the distance between two genes or other detectable DNA segments.
A crossover rate of 1% between two sites on a chromosome has been arbitrarily designated as equal to one «map unit».
Thus two genes on the same chromosome are said to be ten map units apart if experiments show a 10% crossover frequency between them. 
This map unit is expressed as one centimorgan, or cM, in honor of the great geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan.

This method of mapping tends to give an inaccurate map distance between genes that are a long way apart because multiple crossovers between them will often occur.
The most accurate genetic linkage maps are those for which observations have been made on the crossover values between as many different sites on the chromosome as possible.

Using the data from laboratory crosses made among over 1000 generations of Drosophila , the genetic linkage map of the fruit fly is one of the most complete for any organism with the exception of the bacterium E. coli .
We have excellent maps as well for laboratory mice, corn, and Neurospora .
Obviously, planned genetic crosses are not possible in humans and the number of offspring from any one mating is relatively small.
Compared to a life span of two weeks for Drosophila , the period of time required for another generation to occur in humans typically allows under the best of conditions three generations for study, the children, parents, grandparents. 
As a result, until very recently, relatively few human genes had been placed on a genetic linkage map and most of those were on the X chromosome.

It is easy to see why the X chromosome lends itself to mapping.
Crossing-over between X chromosomes can take place only in the female since she is XX.
The male X and Y chromosomes are only partly homologous.
They are the only human chromosome pair which differ greatly in size, the Y being much smaller. 
As a result there are many genes on the larger X chromosome which do not have a corresponding gene on the Y.
Therefore, even if a gene on the X chromosome is recessive, it could still be active because there would be no possibility of a dominant gene on the Y to repress its activity.
Hemophilia and certain forms of color blindness, which occur almost exclusively in males, are classic examples of genes which are obviously on the X chromosome because of this inheritance pattern.
Such disorders are possible in females only if both X chromosomes bear the same recessive genes, a very rare occurrence.

We have already pointed out that the closer together genes are on the same chromosome, the less frequently crossing-over takes place between them.
Therefore, rather than trying to follow the inheritance of only entire genes, one can estimate the distance between a gene of particular interest and any other DNA sequence that is identifiable (a «marker») on the same chromosome.
This procedure is very important because the major problem in genetic linkage lies in detecting the presence of the genes in a person's cells.
This identification is made easier if one is following genes which cause a detectable genetic disease.
These genes can be followed over several generations if the symptoms of the disease are obvious.

Let's look at a practical example of the use of a marker. 
If people who develop a genetic disease almost always inherit the same version of a certain marker, the disease gene and the marker must lie very close together on the same chromosome. 
Correlating the marker and the disease gene requires that two conditions be met.
First, the marker must be detectable, and second, it must be found in several distinguishable forms.
If the two forms of the marker on the chromosome pair are identical, then crossovers between the diseased gene and the marker would be untraceable in the offspring.
To use a fanciful hypothesis, suppose that the disease gene were near to a purple marker.
If the corresponding site on the other member of that chromosome pair were also purple, then an exchange between those two sites by a crossing-over would result in both chromosomes having a purple site.
If the corresponding site was not purple but yellow, a crossover would be readily detectable.

Until recently, only a few markers met such stringent criteria. 
The first assignment of a gene to a specific non-sex chromosome occurred in 1968 when scientists showed that the inheritance of certain blood group proteins was linked to chromosome number 1.
Only a few dozen such markers were then known and for want of such markers most of the human genome remained inaccessible. 

It should be stressed here that the decision to map the human genome actually occurred long before the current large-scale coordinated initiative.
The scientist who had the most influence in those early years was Victor McCusick of Johns Hopkins University.
In 1968 he began to put together his book The Mendelian Inheritance of Man .
In 1971, there were 15 genes that had been mapped to human chromosomes. 
The ninth and latest edition in 1990, still being compiled and edited by McCusick, lists 4937 mapped genes.

Figure 1

The genes-represented here by letters-are in pairs called alleles

These alleles are on the same position (locus) on a homologous chromosome pair.

Figure 2

(a) Each cell begins with 46 chromosomes 

(b) The chromosomes replicate, resulting in 92 per cell.
(c) In mitosis, the chromosomes are divided equally into two identical cells.
In meiosis, there are two cell divisions, resulting in 4 gametes, each with 23 chromosomes. 
Each one of the latter chromosomes is a member of an original homologous pair.

In the late 1960s, even before the molecular biology breakthroughs of the next decade, a fascinating method was developed that expanded the possibility of correlating specific genes with particular chromosomes.
The technique uses human and rodent cells grown in culture.

It also involves the use of a virus with a most useful property.
Most viruses have a specific point for attachment to a cell.
A «Sendai» virus has several points of attachment so that it can simultaneously attach to two different cells if they are close together.
A virus is so small compared to the average cell that this attachment to two very closely adjacent cells often causes the membranes of the two cells to fuse together and the two cells blend into one.
If suspensions of mouse tumor cells and human connective tissue cells are mixed together in the presence of Sendai virus, the virus may cause the formation of human-mouse hybrid cells.
The old question «Are you a man or a mouse?
» can now be answered by «Both».

When viewed through a microscope, human and mouse chromosomes can be easily told apart.

Fortunately for the experimental technique, the human chromosomes are gradually eliminated from the cells as the hybrid cells divide. 

Careful manipulation of this characteristic can result in a population of cells that contains one or even part of one human chromosome.
Eventually, cell lines can be developed that contain, in total, all of the human chromosomes.
In studying such cells therefore, one can then look for human DNA which is not ordinarily found in mouse cells.
The presence of such DNA in a hybrid cell means that it has actually become part of the genome.
Of the approximately 5000 human genes mapped so far, about 1000 have been located by this process of making hybrid cells.

The Sendai virus had put new life into genome mapping, but despite this ingenious approach its use was still limited to assigning some genes to certain chromosomes, somewhat analogous to determining that a particular city is in a specific country. 

The recombinant DNA revolution of the 1970s supplied the tools to bring about unprecedented advances in genetic linkage mapping.
Recognizing the potential of the new molecular approach, in 1978 Raymond White of the University of Utah committed his lab to developing a set of markers based on the detection of unique DNA sequences.

He and others soon developed a strategy which led to the possibility of mapping human genes on the scale envisioned by the Human Genome Project.
It is based on the normal variation between nitrogenous base sequences in chromosome pairs.
A difference in these sequences between the two chromosomes occurs, on the average, every 200 to 500 base pairs.

You will recall that restriction enzymes cut nucleotides at specific nitrogenous base sequences.
That means that a variation in DNA sequence that creates or eliminates a site where an enzyme will cut will alter the length of some of the DNA fragments when that DNA is treated with the enzyme.
This variation between restriction enzyme cutting sites between the same areas of chromosome pairs creates a «restriction- fragment length polymorphism» (RFLP) (pronounced riflips by the in crowd).
This formidable-sounding phenomenon has moved genetic linkage mapping to a new era.
RFLPs provide an enormously rich supply of detectable markers.

If we are looking at an entire human genome, however, a typical restriction enzyme has millions of cutting sites to work on.
How can one or a few fragments of different sizes be located among millions which are the same?
The answer lies once again in the use of gel electrophoresis.

The cut fragments of the genome are spread out on a gel according to size.
Then a DNA probe can be applied to pick out a specific spot in the assortment of fragments.

If the radioactive bands appear at different places on gel patterns of DNA from different individuals, the DNA probe has detected a variation in the enzyme cutting pattern between the DNA of those two individuals.

Many hundreds of probes may have to be screened before a usable one is found.
When a probe is found, one then has a powerful marker system- the probe and the RFLP that it detects.
The inheritance pattern of the RFLP can then be traced instead of relying on tracing a disease.
RFLPs are scattered abundantly throughout the human genome and have multiplied manyfold the markers available for mapping our chromosomes. 

RFLPs have been a useful tool in providing a definitive diagnosis for a variety of diseases including sickle-cell anemia and Huntington's disease.
In addition to diagnosis, the linkage between a marker such as an RFLP and a disease gene is the first critical step in narrowing down the search for that gene and a means of isolating large amounts of a specific chromosomal segment for the purpose of isolating and characterizing the gene itself.

A person's individual set of RFLP markers can be used to produce a «genetic fingerprint.» These have proven to be very useful in forensic medicine since the probability that two people would have the same set of RFLP markers is infinitesimally small.
The courts now accept evidence based on identification of individuals through such analysis of DNA.

Scientists estimate that 3000 well-spaced markers will be needed to achieve a completely linked map with markers an average of one centimorgan apart.
Each centimorgan covers about 30 to 40 genes.
For the first five years of the Human Genome Project the goal has been set as the development of a map in which markers are separated by a minimum of two to five centimorgans, which would require 600 to 1500 markers.
To have markers at even intervals on the chromosomes, however, requires a much larger set of random markers on the map.
Also, DNA must be collected from hundreds of individuals in dozens of large families and tested for the RFLP characteristics of each marker site.

A recent innovation has made RFLP use even more effective. 
At many sites on the human chromosome DNA has simple base sequences that do not code for proteins and are repeated many times.
The origin and significance of these «tandem repeats» is a mystery but they have proven to be of great use in linkage mapping.
The number of repeats at a given locus can vary from a few to hundreds of copies.
If a restriction enzyme cuts near these variable tandem repeats, the resulting fragments will vary correspondingly in length.
This variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs) is so common that the odds are good that an individual will carry different versions of them on homologous chromosomes.

Even newer methods of mapping have been recently developed. 
In 1988, David Cox and Richard Myers of the University of California at San Francisco announced that they had devised a totally new approach to genetic linkage mapping which they termed «radiation hybrid mapping».
Instead of looking at how often two markers are separated during crossing-over, their method looks at how often the markers are broken apart if the chromosomes are bombarded with X rays.
Early trials have shown that this approach may lead to a 20-fold greater resolution than current linkage mapping.

Figure 3

The pattern of DNA pieces cut by the same restriction enzymes varies with the source of the DNA

The variation (RFLP) is seen in the rates of travel along an electrophoresis gel due to the different size of the fragments.

While the genetic linkage map provides a powerful tool for narrowing the search for genes, it is not sufficient for actually isolating a gene and removing it for study.
That kind of specificity must come from a second approach, «physical mapping».
The physical map provides the real physical distance between landmarks on the chromosomes.
In discussing the physical map, we need to explain the concept of STS, the use of which applies to physical as well as genetic mapping. 

Physical mapping depends on the complex and difficult task of attempting to determine the exact order in which the pieces of DNA that are being analyzed had originally existed in the chromosome.
The distance between sites on a chromosome is measured in terms of physical length such as numbers of nucleotide pairs.
The ultimate physical map would be the exact order of the 3 billion nitrogenous bases in the nucleotides that constitute the human genome.

Physical maps can be put together in a variety of ways, some of which date back to the early years of human genetic analysis while others take advantage of the most recent developments of molecular biology.

There are two major categories of physical maps.
The first is the «cytogenetic» map which displays a pattern of landmarks that are actually visible on the chromosomes. 
Here, the inheritance of genes is linked to the inheritance of areas on the chromosomes that can be seen through the microscope. 

A variety of staining techniques have been developed which highlight certain regions or «bands» in the chromosomes. 
Each of the 46 chromosomes turns out to have a unique intricate banding pattern.
The molecular basis of these bands, which occur in other organisms as well, is not known. 
They are presumed to be due to the folding produced by the interaction of DNA and proteins.
A single band represents about 10 million base pairs.
Nearly 1000 bands have been detected in the human chromosomes by staining and light microscopy. 
A single band represents an average of 100 genes.

A standardized map of bands in human chromosomes has been developed which has proven to be useful in correlating visible, often subtle changes in chromosome structure in certain genetic disorders.
For example, some cancers are associated with the production of abnormal DNA sequences which appear as changes in band patterns.
Also, the detection of a «deletion», the loss of a small part of a chromosome, is aided by looking for losses of bands.
