
Future Contraceptives

Vaccines for men and women will eventually join new implants, better spermicides and stronger, thinner condoms. 

With a range of contraceptives already available, are new ones even necessary?
Absolutely.
Among those who practice birth control (including more than half the world's couples), dissatisfaction with current methods is high.
This unhappiness often leads to misuse or abandonment of otherwise effective approaches and thus contributes significantly to high rates of accidental pregnancy and of abortion.
In the U.S., more than half of all pregnancies every year are unintended, and roughly 1.6 million of the approximately 6.4 million women who become pregnant elect to have an abortion.

The ideal contraceptive would be highly effective, safe, long-acting but readily reversible, virtually free of side effects and applied sometime other than just before sex.
It would also reduce the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and be inexpensive.
No product under study today can meet all these criteria, but several approaches that could be on the market in the first third of the 21st century would meet most of them. 

Beyond Condoms for Men

Right now the only contraceptive device sold for men is the condom.
Once, men covered the penis with animal bladders and lengths of intestines.
Later, the advent of latex allowed uniform products to be made, but many men claim the sheaths reduce their sexual pleasure.
To address this powerful deterrent to use, manufacturers have recently introduced a strong, thin polyurethane condom, and additional films made of the same or other polymers will follow soon.
Aside from interfering less with sensation, these nonlatex materials should be excellent barriers to infection, nonallergenic and more resistant to breakage and to degradation by heat, light and oily lubricants.

The first truly innovative male-oriented approach will manipulate hormones to stop sperm production-a big challenge, given that men typically generate at least 1,000 sperm every minute.
Sperm manufacture is controlled by several hormones. 
The hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which drives the pituitary to secrete luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone.
Luteinizing hormone stimulates the testes to produce testosterone.
This steroid, together with follicle-stimulating hormone, induces cells called spermatogonia in the testes to divide and ultimately give rise to sperm.

One avenue of hormonal attack would be intramuscular injection of an androgen (testosterone or related male hormones), leading to release of the hormone into the bloodstream.
This strategy, which is being studied intensively by the World Health Organization, derives from the finding that circulating androgens instruct the brain to dampen secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone and thus of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone. 
A drawback is that high levels of androgens in the circulation produce troubling side effects-notably, increased irritability, lowered levels of high-density lipoproteins (the "good" kind of cholesterol) and increased acne.
Fortunately, adding a progestin (a synthetic form of the female steroid progesterone) seems to allow men to take a lower androgen dose, an innovation that should eliminate side effects and be safer than taking an androgen alone.
The combination treatment will probably offer three months of protection and should be ready in about a decade.
This lag time may seem surprising, but development of any new contraceptive technology takes 10 to 20 years.

As an alternative, one could block the activity of gonadotropin-releasing hormone with molecules that do not cause androgen-related side effects.
Antagonists consisting of small proteins, or peptides, already exist, but they are not potent enough to serve as contraceptives.
Investigators are therefore trying to design nonpeptide inhibitors.
Of course, blockade of gonadotropin-releasing hormone would suppress testosterone production, and so men would have to take replacement androgens in order to retain muscle mass, male sexual characteristics and libido. 

Perhaps 20 to 25 years from now, men should also have access to longacting agents (protective for months) that, instead of disturbing natural hormone balances, directly halt sperm production in the testes or impede maturation of newly made sperm in matching chambers connected to the testes: the epididymides.
It is in the epididymides, for example, that sperm first become motile.
Investigations have suggested that disrupting maturation in the epididymides is the more feasible option, for a couple of reasons.
Whether delivered orally, by injection or by an implant, drugs aimed at sperm would have to reach the testes or epididymides via the bloodstream; however, blood-borne drugs often have difficulty passing out of the circulation and into the part of the testes where sperm are manufactured.
Further, many drugs that are capable of stalling sperm synthesis have proved toxic to spermatogonia in the testes and would thus lead to irreversible sterility.
Such action would be fine for pets but would be unacceptable to most men.

Vaccines for Both Sexes

The 21st century should also see contraceptive vaccines (immunocontraceptives) for men as well as women; these vaccines will probably be effective for about a year.
Most of them would prod the immune system to make antibodies able to bind to, and disrupt the functioning of, selected proteins involved in reproduction.
The immune system would be set in motion by injecting a person with many copies of the target protein-known as an antigen or immunogen-along with other substances capable of boosting the body's response.

One of the more promising vaccines to have reached clinical trials aims to raise antibodies that will inhibit gonadotropin-releasing hormone in men.
Because this vaccine, developed by the Population Council, would shut down testosterone production, men would, once again, need androgen-replacement therapy.

Two versions of a female vaccine are also being tested. 
They target human chorionic gonadotropin, a hormone that is secreted by the nascent placenta and is needed for implantation. 
One version, which was developed by the Indian National Institute of Immunology, has undergone preliminary human trials of efficacy in India, and similar trials are planned for the other approach, which is being developed by the World Health Organization.

Vaccines given to men or women could also lead to immune responses that would immobilize sperm, cause them to clump together or otherwise prevent them from swimming to or fusing with an egg.
Female vaccines could additionally stimulate the production of antibodies that would bind to the surface of an ovulated egg and form a shield impenetrable to sperm.
Immunocontraceptives will be among the later birth-control tools to appear, primarily because candidate immunogens must be studied in great detail.
Scientists have to be sure that the inoculations will not induce immune responses against unintended tissues, and they have to find methods for producing vaccines in quantity. 
Adding to the complexity, vaccines will probably need to contain several antigens, to compensate for the fact that people can differ in their responsiveness to individual antigens. 

For Women: Many Hormonal Options 

Well before vaccines appear and other alternatives to condoms show up for men, women will already have amassed experience with several new products, many of them hormonal.
Currently women can choose from various hormonal methods:
oral contraceptives, monthly injections, an injection that works for three months, and the five year Norplant system, in which six flexible hormone-containing rods (the size of wooden matches) are placed under the skin. 
Birth-control pills, which are reasonably safe and very effective (and may well be sold without a prescription in the 21st century), provide progestins alone or in combination with synthetic estrogen.
The injectables and implants consist of progestins.
In all cases, the approaches serve to block ovulation and increase the thickness of cervical mucus so that sperm have difficulty navigating to the egg.

Within five years, women can expect to have a doughnut-shaped ring that will fit in the vagina like a diaphragm and release a progestin alone or with estrogen. A typical ring might be kept in place for three weeks and removed for one week (to allow for menses).
It would thereby obviate the need to take a daily pill.
Also in the next few years, the manufacturer of Norplant is expected to introduce a second-generation implant consisting of just two rods that will be simpler than the original to insert and remove.
In time there will be single-rod implants and a biodegradable system that will eventually dissolve in the body but will be removable, and hence reversible, for a while. 

Soon after the year 2000 an intrauterine device (IUD) that releases a progestin and lasts for five years should be obtainable in the U.S. (It is already available in some European countries.) Existing nonhormonal IUDs work for many years and are quite effective in women who have been pregnant.
But clinical tests indicate the new device produces less cramping and blood loss during menstruation and carries a lower risk of pelvic inflammatory disease.

Many researchers are giving special emphasis to developing a pill that could be taken just once a month, either at the time menses is expected or on the last day of a woman's period (to prevent pregnancy for the following month).
For certain women, the latter would be most desirable, because it would prevent conception rather than induce an early abortion.
Unfortunately, progress on such pills has been slowed by lack of detailed knowledge about the mechanisms that stimulate and stop monthly bleeding. 

At some point in her life, a woman is likely to have unprotected sex.
Emergency postcoital contraceptives are already sold; they are commonly known as morning-after pills, even though they can actually be taken two or three days after intercourse.
Regular birth-control pills can also serve as emergency contraceptives if taken in the right doses.
Yet all these approaches have unpleasant side effects, such as nausea, and so research is under way to develop gentler versions.
For instance, the French pill RU 486, which is available in several nations outside the U.S. and is best known for terminating confirmed pregnancies, has been found to cause relatively little discomfort when taken in a low dose within 72 hours after unprotected sex.

Sperm Police Could Act Locally

A rather different contraceptive strategy for women will rely on chemicals that directly prevent sperm from migrating to or fertilizing an egg.
These compounds might be supplied by a vaginal ring, for long-term protection, or might be delivered into the vagina shortly before sex in the same way as spermicides are administered.
They would differ from spermicides in several ways, however.

Spermicides are detergents that degrade sperm.
Regrettably, these detergents can also kill microorganisms that help to maintain proper acidity in the vagina.
And they can irritate the vaginal wall, thereby possibly facilitating infection by viruses and bacteria.
The compounds under investigation would not be detergents; they would act more specifically, by interfering with selected events that follow ejaculation.
Consequently, they could probably be formulated in ways that would be nonirritating and would avoid disrupting the vaginal flora.

The chemicals could impede any number of events that follow ejaculation.
After sperm are deposited in the vagina, they undergo a variety of changes important for fertilization. 
For instance, cholesterol is removed from the membrane encasing the sperm head; this step makes the membrane more fluid and thus enables other molecules to move to new positions as needed.
Later, with the assistance of progesterone in the fallopian tubes, specialized channels in the sperm membrane open, allowing calcium ions from the environment to flow in. 
These ions facilitate the "acrosome" reaction, which occurs when sperm first meet the zona pellucida, the jellylike coat surrounding the outer membrane of the egg.
In the acrosome reaction the sperm plasma membrane fuses with that of the acrosome, a sac of enzymes in the sperm head.
Then the enzymes pour out and carve a path for sperm through the egg's coat.

Chemicals being explored for impeding maturation and the acrosome reaction include ones that clog calcium channels or prevent cholesterol from leaving the plasma membrane. (These chemicals are also being eyed for men; they would be useful if they bound tightly to sperm in the epididymides and remained attached during the journey through the female reproductive tract.) Rather than preventing maturation of sperm, some researchers are attempting to induce a premature acrosome reaction-an event that would render sperm unable to meld with an egg.

Related strategies would inhibit specific interactions that normally occur between sperm and the zona pellucida.
For instance, researchers at Duke University Medical Center have developed a compound that binds to a sperm protein (zona receptor kinase) at the site normally reserved for interaction with a protein in the zona.
Attachment of the compound blocks the enzyme from acting on the egg's coat.
Additionally, sperm and seminal fluid carry antioxidant enzymes, which protect the integrity of the sperm membrane.
If certain of these antioxidants were unique to sperm or to seminal fluid, investigators would be able to design drugs that in- activated those particular enzymes but did not deprive other cells of antioxidant defenses. 
In some instances, pure, laboratory-generated antibodies (monoclonal antibodies) might take the place of certain nonbiological chemicals as the active ingredients in contraceptives delivered into the vagina.

Combating Sexual Disease

As the incidence of sexually transmitted diseases climbs, it is becoming increasingly critical to combine contraception with barriers to infection.
Such barriers can be physical (as in male and female condoms and, to some degree, the diaphragm) or chemical (as in spermicides or the more selective formulations under investigation).
To prevent infection by the AIDS-causing human immunodeficiency virus or other microbes, a chemical barrier would, at minimum, have to coat the entire vaginal wall and cervix, be nonirritating and be nontoxic to beneficial microbes in the vagina.
These features alone might be enough to reduce infection significantly, but agents intended to kill harmful microorganisms actively could be added as well.

Investigators are only now beginning to evaluate whether existing spermicides possess the essential features needed to avoid transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
So far it appears the formulations do reduce the risk of acquiring at least one sexually transmitted disease- Chlamydia infection.
Within the next 10 years, spermicides designed to include disease-preventing properties will probably be sold.
Such spermicides would be of enormous benefit to female health because they would offer unobtrusive protection when men fail to use condoms and when condoms themselves fail.

A Time Line

Obviously, the contraceptive methods that are emerging today are the fruits of research that was initiated years ago. 
The only new products that will be attainable before the year 2000 are nonlatex condoms, vaginal rings and, possibly, implants for women consisting of one or two hormone-filled rods that are easier to remove than are the extant capsules.
Within a few years thereafter, spermicides that reduce the spread of sexually transmitted diseases will be a welcome addition, as will the progestin-releasing intrauterine device.

The next contraceptives to arrive in the U.S. should be, in order of appearance, new emergency contraceptives (by 2005), a three-month injectable androgen plus a progestin for men (also by about 2005), biodegradable implants for women (by 2010) and immunocontraceptives (perhaps by 2015). (Introduction times outside the U.S. will be influenced by the regulatory requirements of each nation.) Actually, immunocontraceptives and other technologies in early stages of development will reach the market only if the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries take more interest in them.
Most of them are being explored with seed money from the U.S. government and nonprofit organizations here and abroad.
But those funds, totaling about $57 million annually (less than a fourth the cost of developing a single product), cannot pay for the extensive trials of safety and efficacy that are required for licensing.
Such tests require the backing of private industry-support that may not become strong until limits on liability are set and a misperception that little money can be made from contraceptives is overcome.
Because no contraceptive is perfect for everyone, people who want to practice birth control need a broad array of choices.
In spite of the obstacles, I am optimistic that today's ongoing work will go far toward meeting that need in the century ahead.

Tomorrow's infertility treatments 

Over the past decade investigators have markedly advanced techniques for in vitro fertilization-the procedure that yielded the first "test tube" baby in 1978.
Today women can be induced to ovulate many eggs in a single menstrual cycle; the eggs can be removed and injected with sperm or DNA; the embryos can be screened for genetic defects; and healthy embryos can be implanted in the woman's womb.
In the first third of the 21st century, researchers will probably refine these techniques and improve their success rates, but the basic approaches are unlikely to change radically. 

In vitro fertilization is most suitable for women whose fallopian tubes are blocked or whose inability to conceive is unexplained.
The many women who are infertile because of benign, fibroid tumors in the uterus need other therapies.
At the moment, troublesome fibroids are usually reduced by surgery or administration of analogues of gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
Surgery of any kind carries risks, and hormonal treatment can be problematic for infertile women, in part because when the analogues are in use they prevent conception; also, when treatment stops, the fibroids often return.
If scientists can identify unique proteins on the tumors, they should be able to design drugs that will home in on those proteins and cure the tumors simply, without affecting other tissues or causing side effects.
Chances are good that such drugs will become available by the year 2010. 

Similar therapies will probably cure endometriosis, the growth of endometrial cells (from the lining of the uterus) outside of the uterus, such as in and around the fallopian tubes.
The condition causes some infertility and can also lead to severe menstrual cramps.

But it is for men-particularly those who manufacture no sperm-that the most dramatic advances are likely to occur in the next 30 years.
Scientists are perfecting ways to transplant donated precursors of sperm cells into the seminiferous tubules of the testes:
the system of tubes in which sperm are ordinarily made.
Normally, such precursors generate sperm throughout a man's lifetime; presumably the donated cells would do the same.

Figure 0

Substances that bind to certain proteins on the sperm surface could block attachment to the egg's coat

Agents that block removal of cholesterol from the sperm plasma membrane could render sperm unable to penetrate the egg's coat.

Drugs that block calcium ions from entering the sperm head could render sperm unable to penetrate the egg's coat.

Chemicals that disrupt the protective actions of antioxidants could cause sperm to decay.

Figure 1

SPERM HEAD IS THE TARGET of many contraceptive strategies under study for both sexes

Several approaches ( text blocks at left ) rely on synthetic chemicals ( red dots in detail of plasma membrane ) to alter the head in ways that would prevent sperm from fertilizing an egg.
Scientists are also trying to produce contraceptive vaccines. 
Such vaccines would induce the immune system of a man or a woman to produce antibody molecules able to disrupt sperm function.
Certain antibodies, for example, can cause sperm cells to clump together uselessly ( micrograph ).

Figure 2

MOUSE TESTIS that once made no sperm began manufacturing it in quantity after precursor cells from another mouse were implanted near the periphery

The wash of color in the center is a sign that the transplanted cells, which were stained blue, survived and gave rise to sperm.
