
Introduction 

A clear picture of the state of the environment in Europe and the main areas requiring action at national or international level are presented in the report, Europe s Environment:
The Second Assessment, summarised in this overview.

Designed to form a key input to the June 1998 Environment for Europe Conference in Aarhus, the fourth meeting of Environment Ministers of all European countries, the report builds on and updates Europe s Environment:
The Dobris Assessment, the first pan-European state of the environment report published in 1995 by the European Environment Agency (EEA).
That comprehensive report covered 46 countries and, based largely on data up to around 1992, provided an assessment of the state of the environment throughout Europe at that time.
The Dobris assessment was presented to the third conference of Environment Ministers of all European countries, which met in Sofia in October 1995.

These conferences aim to set out principles and policies for improving the environment, moving towards convergence of environmental policies in the pan-European region, and achieving a more sustainable pattern of development in Europe.

At the Sofia meeting, the Ministers welcomed the report as an important baseline document against which future progress under the Environmental Programme for Europe (EPE) could be assessed.
They asked the EEA to produce a second assessment in time for their next planned meeting in Denmark in 1998.

Europe s Environment:
The Second Assessment is the Agency s response to this request.

The report concentrates on the 12 key environmental problems focused upon in the earlier report and shows how the situation has developed since the start of the Environment for Europe process in 1991 (in practice 1990 is often taken as the reference year).
This focus, based on the mandate from the Sofia ministerial conference, means that not all environmental problems occurring in Europe are reported on here.
Future reports from the European Environment Agency will aim to be gradually more comprehensive.
These will be supplemented with particular assessments targeted on specific problems of concern, while gradually extending their geographical coverage.

In addition to providing information about the state of the environment and trends in 12 environmental problems, this report identifies the main socio-economic driving forces exerting pressure on the European environment.
While presenting a clear picture of the changing state of the environment, the report identifies key areas where further action is needed.

Environmental experts from many European countries have helped the EEA to prepare this report.
Unfortunately, mechanisms to collect harmonised data on the environment on a European scale are still inadequate, despite the priority given to this in the EPE.
The resources made available for preparing this report were not by themselves sufficient to overcome this problem, and coverage of countries thus varies throughout the report.
In particular, a bias towards Western Europe could not be avoided.
Nevertheless, the report provides the most comprehensive and reliable overview, with conclusions supported by a substantial body of background material from the whole of Europe.

The next section of this overview summarises progress with the main European environmental problems and concludes with an analysis of the contribution of the principal societal sectors to the problems and their solutions.
The final section provides summaries of the 12 environmental topics reviewed in the main report.

Country groupings used in this report 

Western Europe:
(EU+EFTA+Switzerland) Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, + Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland.

CEE:
Central and Eastern Europe (all central European countries, the Baltic States, Turkey, Cyprus and Malta) Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Estonia, FR of Yugoslavia, FYROM, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, and Turkey, Cyprus and Malta.

NIS:
the European Newly Independent States (not including the Baltic states) Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, the Russian Federation, the Ukraine.

In the text, for convenience, the term Eastern Europe is sometimes used to cover both Central and Eastern European countries and the Newly Independent States.

General conclusions 

PROBLEMS 

Table 1 gives an overall summary assessment of progress over (roughly) the past five years for each of the 12 key European environmental problems identified in the Dobris assessment and evaluated in this report.

It distinguishes progress in policy development from progress in improving the quality of the environment which sometimes lags behind policy development.

Inevitably, the information base for this assessment is more reliable for some areas than for others.
It is particularly weak for chemicals, biodiversity and the urban environment.
Thus, for example, the "neutral sign" for progress in policies addressing tropospheric ozone is based on a more solid foundation and understanding than the similar score for chemicals, where changing perceptions about the underlying problems and severe data shortages have hampered attempts at evaluation.

Table 1

Key Environmental Problem

- policies 
- state of environment 
- climate change
- stratospheric ozone depletion
- acidification
- tropospheric ozone
- chemicals
- waste
- biodiversity
- inland waters 
- marine and coastal environment
- soil degradation
- urban environment 
- technological and natural hazards

Legend:
positive development with regard to development of policies or state of the environment.

some policy development, but insufficient to deal with the full problem (including insufficient geographical coverage).

Little or no change in the state of the environment.
Can also indicate uncertain or varying developments in the various areas.

Little development of policies or unfavourable development of the state of the environment.

Can also indicate continuing high pressure or poor state of the environment.

Atmospheric issues 

Strong moves over a number of years towards co- ordinating policies and action throughout Europe and beyond to reduce harmful emissions and improve the quality of the atmosphere have led to substantial reductions in most European countries in the emissions of several substances that threaten the environment and human health.
These include sulphur dioxide, lead and ozone-depleting substances.
There have been smaller reductions in emissions of nitrogen oxides and Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOCs).

In Western Europe, these changes have been due mainly to the implementation of emission reduction policies and to structural changes in industrial production and shifts to cleaner fuels.
In Central and Eastern Europe, the effects of abatement measures have been dwarfed by the steep reductions in energy use and industrial production following structural economic change, leading to considerable reductions in inputs and emissions.

Progress towards reduction targets for emissions to the air is shown in Table 2.
It is only for pollutants mentioned in this table that Conventions and Protocols have set quantitative targets at pan-European level.

Table 2

Progress towards targets 

Note:
NIS data for 4 countries only (Belarus, Moldova, the Russian Federation and the Ukraine).

Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution.

Although this evaluation is done for the whole area, targets are only valid for countries that are party in the conventions.

Despite the progress apparent from Table 2, emissions of several pollutants need to be further reduced so that targets already agreed and new ones in prospect - can be met.
Most of the emission reductions achieved so far have resulted from economic change and measures directed at large sources in the industry and energy sectors.
With the exception of lead from petrol, there has been less success in reducing emissions from diffuse sources such as transport and agriculture; these, by their nature, are more difficult to bring under control, demanding better integration between environmental and other policies.

climate change 

While some reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases have been achieved (carbon dioxide emissions in the whole of Europe fell by 12% and in Western Europe by 3% between 1990 and 1995), many of these reductions have resulted from economic changes such as the closure of much heavy industry in Eastern Europe and the switch from coal to gas for electricity generation in some Western European countries.

The energy supply sector is the largest contributor to carbon dioxide emissions (about 35% in 1995), with approximately equal emissions from industry, transport and the household + commercial sectors (around 20% each), and an increasing contribution from the transport sector.
For the EU, the Commission of the European Communities latest "business as usual" scenario suggests an 8% increase of carbon dioxide emissions between 1990 and 2010, in striking contrast to the current target of an 8% reduction (for a "basket" of six gases, including carbon dioxide) for the European Union, as agreed at Kyoto in December 1997.
There will clearly need to be action at all levels affecting all economic sectors if the Kyoto target is to be achieved.

depletion of the ozone layer 

Implementation of the Montreal Protocol and its subsequent extensions has reduced the global production and emission of ozone-depleting substances by 80-90%.

Similar reductions have been achieved in Europe.

However, it will take many decades for ozone levels in the stratosphere to recover because of the persistence of ozone-depleting substances in the upper atmosphere.
This underlines the importance of reducing emissions of remaining ozone-depleting substances (HCFCs, methyl bromide) and of ensuring that existing measures are properly enforced, so as to advance the date of recovery of the ozone layer.

acidification 

Some progress has been made since the Dobris assessment in bringing the problem of acidification under control, mainly as a result of the continuing reduction of sulphur dioxide emissions (50% between 1980 and 1995 in the whole of Europe).
Emissions of nitrogen oxides and ammonia have fallen by 15%.
However, for about 10% of Europe s land area the level of acid deposition is still too high.
For NOx emissions by transport, environmental policy has not kept up with growth in transport use the growth in numbers and use of cars is offsetting the benefits of technical improvements such as the increased use of cleaner engines and exhaust catalysts in passenger cars.
This has resulted in the transport sector becoming the dominant contributor to emissions of nitrogen oxides.
The large potential for growth in private transport in CEE and in the NIS is likely to exacerbate the problem.

tropospheric ozone and summer smog 

In spite of rising traffic levels throughout Europe, a significant reduction (14%) in emissions of ozone precursors was achieved in Europe as a whole between 1990 and 1995 through a combination of control measures in various sectors and economic restructuring in Eastern Europe.
However, summer smog, caused by high tropospheric ozone concentrations, still occurs frequently in many European countries, posing a threat to human health and to vegetation.

Further substantial reductions in emissions of NOx and NMVOCs in the whole of the northern hemisphere will be required to achieve a significant reduction in tropospheric ozone concentrations.
The second step to the 1988 NOx Protocol under the UNECE Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) will be a multi-pollutant, multi-effect protocol addressing photochemical pollution, acidification and eutrophication.
This is expected to be ready for adoption in 1999 and will probably aim for more rigorous emission reductions.
Emissions from the fast-growing transport sector, which is the main contributor to emissions of NOx in the whole of Europe and to NMVOC emissions in Western Europe, will be particularly difficult to control.

In Eastern Europe, industry is still the main source of NMVOC emissions, but that situation could change with the expected increase in transport.

chemicals 

The extent of the threat posed to the environment and human health by chemicals remains uncertain because of the vast numbers of chemicals in common use and the lack of knowledge about the ways in which they move through and accumulate in the environment and their human and ecological impacts.

Because of the difficulty of assessing the toxicity of the many potentially hazardous chemicals in use or released (and of their mixtures), some current control strategies are now aimed at reducing the "load" of chemical in the environment (and, thereby, of exposures to them) through elimination or reduction of their use and emissions.
New instruments, such as voluntary reduction programmes and Toxic Release Inventories/Pollutant Emission Registers are gaining increasing attention.

waste 

Reported total waste generation is estimated to have increased by nearly 10% between 1990 and 1995.

However, part of the apparent increase may be the result of improved waste monitoring.

Waste management in most countries continues to be dominated by the cheapest available option:
landfill.

Waste minimisation and prevention are being increasingly recognised as more desirable solutions for waste management, but no overall progress in this direction can yet be seen.
Recycling tends to be more successful in countries with a strong waste management infrastructure.

Priorities in CEE and in the NIS include improving municipal waste management through better separation of wastes and better landfill management, the introduction of recycling initiatives at local level, and carrying out low-cost mitigation and containment at priority disposal sites.

biodiversity 

The overall pressure on biodiversity from human activities (intensive agriculture, forestry, urbanisation and infrastructure development, as well as pollution) has generally increased since the Dobris assessment.

These pressures arise from uniform and increasingly large-scale management of agriculture and forestry, fragmentation of the landscape (leading to isolation of natural habitats and species), loading by chemicals, water extraction, disturbance, and influx of alien species.
Many national and international nature protection initiatives have been launched, but their implementation has been slow.
Locally, some targeted nature protection measures have had beneficial effects, but there has been little progress towards sustainable agriculture.

Parts of CEE and the NIS have the benefit of large tracts of relatively unspoiled forests and other natural habitats.
However, these could be threatened by the pressures resulting from economic change and development unless adequate measures for their protection are built into the Environmental Programme for Europe and into national economic development policies and related financial mechanisms as well as into accession agreements for those countries joining the EU.

inland and marine waters 

The EPE pays particular attention to sustainable management of natural resources, including inland, coastal and marine waters.
However, threats to all these remain.

Although, in the past decade, water abstraction rates have been stable or have even decreased in a number of Western and Eastern European countries, potential water shortages persist, particularly around urban areas.
Leakages from distribution systems in some countries, and inefficient water use in all countries continue to be problems.

Groundwater quality and, consequently, human health are threatened by high concentrations of nitrate from agriculture.
Concentrations of pesticides in groundwater commonly exceed EU maximum admissible concentrations and many countries report groundwater pollution by heavy metals, hydrocarbons and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Improvements in groundwater quality will take many years to achieve because of the time taken for pollutants to enter and move through groundwater.

Since 1990, there has been no overall improvement in river quality in Europe.
Despite a 40-60% reduction in phosphorus emissions over the past five years resulting from measures in industry and waste water treatment and the increasing use of phosphate-free detergents in households the problem of eutrophication of rivers, lakes, reservoirs and coastal and marine waters remains as reported in the Dobris assessment, with excessive nutrient levels in many areas.

Many European seas continue to be heavily over-fished, and stocks of a number of species are seriously depleted, underlining again the urgent call in the EPE for promoting sustainable fisheries.

soil degradation 

Soil erosion and salinisation remain serious problems in many areas, particularly around the Mediterranean.

Little progress has been achieved in soil conservation, another area given particular attention in the EPE.
A large number of contaminated sites are in need of remediation.
Currently, 300 000 potentially contaminated sites have been identified, mainly in Western Europe, particularly in areas with a long tradition of heavy industry.

In Eastern Europe, where there is a large number of contaminated military areas, better information is needed to ascertain the extent of the problem.

urban environment 

The urban population in Europe has continued to increase and European cities continue to show signs of environmental stress poor air quality, excessive noise, traffic congestion, loss of green areas and degradation of historical buildings and monuments.

Although there have been some improvements since the Dobris assessment (for example, in urban air quality), many stresses, especially from transport, are increasingly leading to a deterioration in the quality of life and human health.
One positive development has been a growing interest by cities in the local Agenda 21 movement.
More than 290 European cities have signed the Aalborg Charter of European Cities and Towns towards Sustainability.
Implementation of local Agenda 21 policies and instruments, with their promise of significant improvement from concerted local action, is fast becoming the most crucial development in cities.

technological and natural hazards 

In addition to the stresses constantly imposed by day- to-day human activities, Europe s environment is affected by infrequent impacts from major technological accidents and natural hazards.
Data on such accidents are at present only available in certain areas on EU level; even fewer data are available for CEE and NIS.
On the basis of reported events, the number of industrial accidents per unit of activity in the EU appears to be decreasing.

Damage from floods and other disasters with a climatological background is increasing in Europe, possibly as a result of human influences such as changes in the landscape (including soil sealing under urban areas and infrastructure), as well as from the more frequent occurrence of extreme weather events.

SECTORS 

The assessment above shows that, although some pressures on the environment have been reduced, this has not generally led to an improvement in the state or quality of the environment of Europe.
This is due, in some cases, to natural time delays (in processes such as stratospheric ozone depletion or the build-up of phosphorus concentrations in lakes).
However, in many cases the measures taken have been too limited, given the scale and complexity of the problem (for example, summer smog or pesticides in groundwater).

A traditional focus for European environmental policies has been on the control of pollution at source and the protection of particular parts of the environment.

More recently, the integration of environmental considerations into other policy areas and the promotion of sustainable development have come to the fore.

Transport, energy, industry and agriculture are key sectoral "driving forces" that impact on Europe s environment.
The development of environmental policies and their effective implementation varies widely between these sectors.
The industry and energy sectors are reasonably well covered by policies, but some areas still need attention (e.g. energy efficiency, renewable energy); agriculture is covered to a lesser extent and is under review; the situation for the transport sector remains unsatisfactory.

Transport:
Goods transport by road in the whole of Europe has increased by 54% since 1980 (measured in tonne-km), passenger transport by car has increased by 46% since 1985 (passenger-km, EU only) and the number of passengers transported by air has grown by 67% since 1985.

In the transport sector more than any other, environmental policies are failing to keep up with the pace of growth.
Problems of congestion, air pollution and noise are increasing.
Until recently, the growth of transport has been widely regarded as a fundamental part of economic growth and development:
governments have set themselves the task of developing the necessary infrastructure, while the environmental task has been restricted to ensuring that vehicle emission standards and fuel quality are gradually improved, and that the choice of traffic routes is made subject to environmental impact assessment.

This report shows that some progress has been made on these limited objectives in most of Europe.

Nevertheless, the continuing growth of traffic and transport infrastructure has resulted in an overall growth in transport-related environmental problems and public concern about them.
This is now leading to more fundamental questioning of the link between economic development and the growth of traffic.

Recently efforts are being made to restrain growth in the demand for transport, promote more use of public transport, and encourage new patterns of settlement and production which reduce the need for transport.
This transformation to a more sustainable pattern of transport will not be easy to achieve because there is considerable political momentum behind the traditional approach to infrastructure development, and public transport is losing out to private transport everywhere in Europe.

Energy use, which is the basic driving force behind climate change and a number of air pollution problems, has remained at a consistently high level in Western Europe since the Dobris assessment.
In CEE and the NIS, energy consumption has fallen by 23% since 1990 as a result of economic restructuring, but is expected to rise again as economic recovery takes off.
Greater efficiency in the production and use of energy is a key requirement of a more sustainable energy policy.

Relatively low energy prices have not provided a sufficient stimulus for energy efficiency improvements in Western Europe.
Currently energy efficiency is improving by about 1% per year, but GDP is continuing to grow by about 2 to 3% per year.

Considerable scope exists for further improvement in energy efficiency in Western Europe, particularly in the transport and household sectors, but experience suggests that, while fossil fuel prices remain low, more vigorous policy measures will be needed to achieve such improvement.
In Eastern Europe, economic convergence with the West could reverse the current trend towards lower energy consumption and lead to a resumption of growth in emissions of greenhouse gases and other air pollutants, particularly in the industrial, transport and household sectors.
So here, too, new measures to promote energy efficiency in the production and consumption of energy are likely to be needed.

Industry:
The relative contribution of industry to the problems of climate change, acidification, tropospheric ozone and water pollution has decreased since the Dobris assessment.

In Western Europe, environmental objectives are becoming integrated into industrial decision-making, resulting in falling total industrial emissions to air and water.
However, such integration is not common in Eastern Europe, underlining the need in these countries for well-designed and well-resourced administrative structures for the implementation and enforcement of environmental legislation, and for the wider use of environmental management systems by business.

Technological "leapfrogging" may occur when a significant part of the production system is renewed.

In all of Europe, the environmental impact of small and medium-sized enterprises is considerable, as is their potential for improvement.
In general, these enterprises are not yet being subjected to effective environmental measures.

Agriculture:
In the past, agricultural policies in Europe have generally been directed towards maximising food production and maintaining farm incomes.
More recently, policies are beginning to direct more attention to environmental requirements and the need for more sustainable agriculture.
The report shows, however, that there is still a long way to go.

In Western Europe, yields have continued to increase in the past five years as a result of advances in agricultural practices.
Use of inputs like inorganic fertilisers and pesticides (measured in weight of active substances) has levelled off (although, as indicated above, this is not leading to any immediate improvement in groundwater quality), but water use has continued to increase.

With the increase of livestock production, animal manure production and the emission of reduced nitrogen compounds, eutrophication has become a major problem in north-west Europe and is increasing in significance in southern Europe.
Natural habitats and biodiversity are, in many places, under pressure from agricultural intensification and the spread of new settlements.

Individual countries have started to stimulate more environmentally friendly farming, but environmental considerations are still only a small part of the Common Agricultural Policy of the European Union (CAP).

Implementation of GATT and CAP reform may lead to further rationalisation and specialisation of agricultural production, and abandonment of more marginal land.

However, there is no simple relationship between abandonment and its impact on biodiversity.

In Eastern Europe, structural reform, modernisation and diversification of the agricultural sector remain a priority.
However, the complexities and uncertainties of the situation make it difficult to make an overall assessment of the impact of such developments.

Overall, achieving sustainable levels of environmental pressure and use of resources is likely to require major technological advances and major shifts to less resource- intensive and environmentally harmful activities.

While at national level there has been some progress in developing policies that integrate environmental requirements into decision-making (such as environmental action plans or requirements for strategic environmental assessments), there is a long way to go in implementing these on a pan- European scale.
However, the scope for improvements that are large enough to overcome the environmental impacts of growth in production and consumption is considerable, particularly in CEE and the NIS.
In these countries, economic restructuring and technological renewal provide opportunities for avoiding some of the more wasteful technologies of Western Europe.

Conclusions per environmental problem 

Climate change 

European annual mean air temperatures have increased by 0.3-0.6°C since 1900.
Climate models predict further increases, above 1990 levels, of about 2°C by the year 2100, with higher increases in the north of Europe than in the south.
The potential consequences include increases in sea level, more frequent and intense storms, floods and droughts, and changes in biota and food productivity.
How serious these consequences will be depends partly on the extent to which adaptation measures are implemented in the coming years and decades.

Ensuring that further temperature increases are at no more than 0.1°C per decade and that sea levels rise by no more than 2 cm per decade (provisional limits assumed for sustainability) would require industrialised countries to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and various halogenated compounds) by at least 30-55% by 2010 from 1990 levels.

Such reductions are much higher than the commitments made by developed countries at the third conference of parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Kyoto in December 1997, which were to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in most European countries to 8% below the 1990 levels by 2010.
Some CEE countries committed themselves to greenhouse gas reductions of between 5% and 8% in 2010 compared with 1990, while the Russian Federation and the Ukraine undertook to stabilise their emissions at 1990 levels.

It is uncertain whether the EU will achieve the original UNFCCC target, set in 1992, of stabilising emissions of carbon dioxide (the most important greenhouse gas) in 2000 at 1990 levels, because emissions in 2000 are currently predicted to be up to 5% above 1990 levels.
Furthermore, in contrast to the Kyoto target of an 8% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in 2010 (for a "basket" of six gases, including carbon dioxide), the Commission of the European Communities latest "business as usual" (pre-Kyoto) scenario implies an 8% increase in carbon dioxide emissions between 1990 and 2010, with the largest increase (39%) in the transport sector.

The proposal for one of the key measures at Community level, an energy/carbon tax, has not yet been adopted, but some Western European countries have already introduced such taxes (Austria, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden).
In addition, there is scope for other types of measure to reduce CO2 emissions, some of which are currently being taken by various European countries and the EU.
These include energy efficiency programmes, combined heat and power installations, fuel switching from coal to natural gas and/or wood, measures aimed at changing the modal split in transport and measures aimed at absorbing carbon (increasing the carbon sink) through afforestation.

Energy use, dominated by fossil fuels, is the key influence on emissions of carbon dioxide.
In Western Europe, emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel use fell by 3% between 1990 and 1995, due to economic recession, the restructuring of industry in Germany and the switch from coal to natural gas for electricity generation.
Energy prices in Western Europe during the past decade have been stable and relatively low compared to historical prices, providing little incentive for improving efficiency.
Energy intensity (final energy consumption per unit of GDP) has fallen by only 1% per year since 1980.

Patterns of energy use changed markedly between 1980 and 1995.
Energy use in the transport sector grew by 44%, industrial energy use fell by 8% and other fuel use grew by 7%, reflecting mainly growth in road transport and a move away from energy-intensive heavy industry.
Total energy consumption increased by 10% between 1985 and 1995.

The contribution of nuclear energy to total energy provision increased from 5 to 15% in Western Europe between 1980 and 1994, with Sweden and France depending on nuclear energy for around 40% of their total energy requirements.

In Eastern Europe, carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use fell by 19% between 1990 and 1995, mainly as a result of economic restructuring.
Energy use for transport fell by 3% in CEE over this period and by 48% in the NIS.

Industrial energy use fell by 28% in CEE and by 38% in the NIS.

Energy intensities in CEE are about three times higher than in Western Europe and in the NIS probably five times higher, so there is considerable potential for energy savings.
In a baseline "business as usual" scenario, energy use in 2010 is expected to be 11% lower than in 1990 in the NIS, and 4% higher than in 1990 in CEE.

The contribution of nuclear energy to total energy provision increased from 2 to 6% in the NIS and by from 1 to 5% in CEE between 1980 and 1994.
In Bulgaria, Lithuania and Slovenia, nuclear energy provides around a quarter of total energy requirements.

Methane emissions in CEE and the NIS fell by 40% between 1980 and 1995.
However, there is still considerable scope for further reductions throughout Europe, particularly from gas distribution systems and coal mining.
Emissions of nitrous oxide from industry and the use of mineral fertilisers could also be further reduced throughout Europe.

Emissions of CFCs have fallen rapidly from their peak levels as their production and use are phased out.

However, the use and emission of their substitutes, HCFCs (which are also greenhouse gases), is increasing, as is that of relatively recently identified greenhouse gases such as SF6, HFCs and PFCs, which are part of the "basket" of gases for which emission reduction targets were agreed at Kyoto.

Figure

CO2 emissions in Europe, 1980-1995 

Stratospheric ozone depletion 

International policy measures taken to protect the ozone layer have reduced global annual production of ozone- depleting substances by 80-90% of its maximum value.
Annual emissions have also fallen rapidly.
However, the time delays in atmospheric processes are such that no effects of the international measures can yet be seen in the concentrations of ozone in the stratosphere or in the amount of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation reaching the surface.

The ozone-depleting potential of all chlorine and bromine species (CFCs, halons, etc.) in the stratosphere is expected to reach its maximum between 2000 and 2010.
Above Europe, the amount of ozone in the atmosphere fell by 5% between 1975 and 1995, allowing more UV-B radiation to enter the lower atmosphere and reach the earth s surface.

Large localised reductions in stratospheric ozone concentration have recently been observed over Arctic regions in the spring.
For example, total ozone over the North Pole fell to 40% below normal in March 1997.
These reductions are similar to, but less severe than, those observed over Antarctica and emphasise the need for continuing political attention to stratospheric ozone depletion.

The recovery of the ozone layer, which will take many decades, could be accelerated by a more rapid phase-out of HCFCs and methyl bromide, by ensuring the safe destruction of CFCs and halons in stores and other reservoirs, and by preventing the smuggling of ozone-depleting substances.

Figure

Ozone depleting substances in the stratosphere, 1950-2100

Acidification 

There has been some reduction in the effects of acid deposition originating from emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and ammonia on freshwater since the Dobris assessment, with invertebrate fauna at many sites showing a partial recovery.
The vitality of many forests is still decreasing but, while this damage is not necessarily related to acidification, long-term effects of acid deposition on soils may be playing a role.
In sensitive areas, acidification leads to increased mobility of aluminium and heavy metals, causing groundwater pollution.

Depositions of acidifying substances have decreased since about 1985.
Critical loads (the levels of deposition above which long-term harmful effects can be expected) are, however, still being exceeded in about 10% of Europe s land area, mainly in northern and central Europe.

Emission of sulphur dioxide in Europe halved between 1980 and 1995.
Total nitrogen emissions (nitrogen oxides plus ammonia), which remained roughly constant between 1980 and 1990, fell by about 15% between 1990 and 1995, the largest falls occurring in CEE and the NIS.

The transport sector has become the largest source of emissions of nitrogen oxides, contributing 60% of the total in 1995.
Between 1980 and 1994, road transport of goods increased by 54%; between 1985 and 1995, road transport of passengers increased by 46% and air transport of passengers by 67%.

In Western Europe, the introduction of exhaust catalysts has resulted in reduced emissions from the transport sector.

However, such measures take effect rather slowly because of the low turnover rate of the vehicle fleet.
Further reductions are likely to require fiscal measures on fuels and vehicles.

In CEE and the NIS, there is significant potential for growth in private transport, but also major potential for improving energy efficiency throughout the transport sector.

Policy measures to combat acidification have been only partly successful: 

The target of the protocol of the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLTRAP) on nitrogen oxides, to stabilise emissions at the 1987 level by 1994, was achieved for Europe overall, but not by all the 21 parties.
Some of the parties, however, as well as non-parties, achieved considerable reductions.

The Fifth Environmental Action Plan of the European Commission (5EAP) aimed for a 30% reduction of emissions of nitrogen oxides between 1990 and 2000.
Only an 8% reduction was achieved by 1995, and it does not appear likely that the 2000 target will be met.

A multi-pollutant, multi-effect protocol is expected to be ready in 1999.
The aim will be to set further national emission ceilings, on a cost-effective basis, for acidifying substances and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs).

The target of the first CLRTAP protocol for sulphur, to reduce emissions in 1993 by 30% compared to 1980, was achieved by all 21 parties to the protocol, as well as by five non-parties.
However, several European countries (for example, Portugal and Greece) did not reduce their sulphur emissions in this period to the same extent.

Achieving the interim target of the second sulphur protocol by 2000 is more uncertain, and further measures will be needed to achieve its long-term target, which is no exceedance of critical loads.

The 5EAP target for sulphur dioxide, a reduction of 35% of 1985 emissions by 2000, was achieved for the EU as a whole in 1995 (40% overall reduction) and by most Member States.

Further measures aimed at reaching the long-term target of the second CLRTAP sulphur protocol are under development in the EU, following the 5EAP, including reducing the sulphur content of oil products, reducing emissions from large combustion plants and setting emission limits for road vehicles.
A provisional target of the EU acidification strategy now under discussion is a 55% reduction in emissions of nitrogen oxides between 1990 and 2010.

Particular attention will need to be paid to emissions from the transport sector if this target is to be met.

Figure

Total area of exceedance of the critical load for sulphur and nitrogen

Tropospheric ozone 

Ozone concentrations in the troposphere (from the ground to 10-15km) over Europe are typically three to four times higher than in the pre-industrial era, mainly as a result of the very large growth in emissions of nitrogen oxides from industry and vehicles since the 1950s.
Year-to-year meteorological variability prevents the detection of trends in the occurrence of episodes of high ozone concentration.

Threshold concentrations, set for the protection of human health, vegetation and ecosystems, are frequently exceeded in most European countries.
About 700 hospital admissions in the EU in the period March-October 1995 (75% of them in France, Italy and Germany) may be attributable to ozone concentrations exceeding the health protection threshold.

About 330 million people in the EU may be exposed to at least one exceedance of the threshold per year.

The protection threshold for vegetation was exceeded in most EU countries in 1995.
Several countries reported exceedances for more than 150 days at some sites.
In the same year, almost the entire EU area of forest and arable land experienced exceedances.

Emissions of the most important ozone precursors, nitrogen oxides and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), increased until the late 1980s and then fell by 14% between 1990 and 1994.
The transport sector is the main contributor of nitrogen oxides.
Transport is also the main contributor to emissions of NMVOCs in Western Europe, while in CEE and the NIS, industry is the main contributor.

Meeting the targets for emissions of nitrogen oxides set in the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution s and the Fifth Environmental Action Programme would result in a reduction in peak ozone concentrations of only 5- 10%.

Achieving the long-term target of no exceedance of threshold levels will depend critically on reducing overall tropospheric ozone concentrations.
This will require measures on emissions of the precursor pollutants (nitrogen oxides and NMVOCs) covering the whole of the northern hemisphere.
A first step will be the setting of further national emission ceilings under the new multi-effect, multi-pollutant protocol.

Figure

Daily summer maximum concentrations of ozone

Chemicals 

Since the Dobris assessment, the chemical industry in Western Europe has continued to grow, with production since 1993 growing faster than GDP.
Production in CEE and the NIS has fallen markedly since 1989, in line with the fall in GDP, but since 1993 production has partially recovered in some countries.
The net result is that the flows of chemicals through the economy throughout Europe have increased.

Data on emissions is scarce, but chemicals are widespread in all environmental media, including animal and human tissues.
The European Inventory of Existing Chemical Substances lists over 100 000 chemical compounds.
The threat posed by many of these chemicals remains uncertain because of the lack of knowledge about their concentrations and the ways in which they move through and accumulate in the environment and then impact on humans and other life forms.

Some information, however, is available for example, on heavy metals and persistent organic pollutants (POPs).

Although emissions of some of these substances are falling, concentrations in the environment remain of concern, particularly in some highly contaminated areas and sinks like the Arctic and Baltic Sea.
Although some well-known POPs are being phased out, many others with similar properties are still being produced in large amounts.

Concerns have recently been raised about so-called "endocrine disrupting substances":
POPs and some organo-metallic compounds, particularly as a possible cause of reproductive disturbances in wildlife and humans.
While there are examples of such effects in marine animals, there is so far insufficient evidence to establish causal links between such chemicals and reproductive health effects in humans.

Because of the difficulty and cost of assessing the toxicity of the large numbers of potentially hazardous chemicals in use, particularly those with possible reproductive and neuro-toxicological effects, some current control strategies such as the one chosen by the OSPAR Convention on the protection of the North Sea are now aimed at reducing the "load" of chemicals in the environment through the elimination or reduction of their use and emissions.
The UNECE is expected to finalise two new protocols on emissions to air of three heavy metals and sixteen POPs under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution in 1998.

Since the Dobris assessment, there have been some new national and international initiatives for reducing the possible impacts of chemicals on the environment, including voluntary reduction programmes, taxation of particular chemicals and providing public access to data similar to the US Toxic Release Inventory, as for example under the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive in the EU.
There is scope for a wider application of such instruments in all parts of Europe.

Figure

Reductions of lead emissions from petrol 1990-1996

Waste 

Reported total waste generation in OECD Europe increased by nearly 10% between 1990 and 1995.
However, part of the apparent increase may be the result of improved waste monitoring and reporting.
Lack of harmonisation and incomplete data collection continue to make it difficult to monitor trends and improve the targeting of waste policy initiatives across Europe.

Municipal waste generation is estimated to have increased by 11% in OECD European countries between 1990 and 1995.
Approximately 200 million tonnes of municipal waste was generated in 1995, equivalent to 420 kg/person/year.

Data on municipal waste for CEE countries and the NIS are not sufficiently robust to enable the determination of an underlying trend.

Germany and France were the largest contributors to the approximately 42 million tonnes per year of hazardous waste reported by OECD European countries for the period around 1994.
The Russian Federation accounted for about two-thirds of the 30 million tonnes of hazardous waste generated per year by the whole of Eastern Europe during the early 1990s.
These totals are only indicative because of differences in definition.

Waste management in most countries continues to be dominated by the cheapest available option:
landfill.
However, the costs of landfill rarely include full costs (post-closure costs are seldom included), despite the use of waste taxes in some countries (e.g.
Austria, Denmark and the UK).
Waste prevention and minimisation is being increasingly recognised as environmentally more desirable solutions for waste management.
All waste streams, particularly hazardous wastes, would benefit from further application of cleaner technologies and waste prevention measures.
Recycling is increasing in countries with strong waste management infrastructures.

Many countries in CEE and the NIS face the problems of a legacy of poor waste management and increases in waste generation.
Waste management in these countries requires better strategic planning and more investment.
Priorities include improving municipal waste management through better separation of wastes and better landfill management, the introduction of recycling initiatives at local level and carrying out low-cost measures to prevent soil contamination.

A commitment to the sustainable use of resources, minimising environmental damage and following the "polluter pays principle" and the "proximity principle" has led the EU to create an extensive range of legislative instruments intended to promote and harmonise national legislation on waste.
Some Central European countries are beginning to adopt similar approaches, prompted by the EU accession process.

However, waste legislation is still poorly developed in most other CEE countries and in the NIS.

Figure

Share of countries with the following instruments in waste policy

Biodiversity 

The threat to Europe s wild species continues to be severe and the number of species in decline is growing.

In many countries, up to half of the known vertebrate species are under threat.

More than one-third of the bird species in Europe are in decline, most severely in north-western and central Europe.
This is mainly caused by damage to their habitats by land-use changes, particularly through intensification of agriculture and forestry, increasing infrastructure development, water abstraction and pollution.

However, the populations of a number of animal species associated with human activities are increasing and some plant species tolerant to high nutrient levels or acidity are spreading.
There has also been some recovery in the number of breeding birds in areas where organic farming is practised.
The introduction of alien species is causing problems in marine, inland water and terrestrial habitats.

Wetland loss is greatest in southern Europe, but major losses are also occurring in many agricultural and urbanised areas in north-western and central Europe.
The main causes are land reclamation, pollution, drainage, recreation and urbanisation.
Some large and many minor restoration projects in rivers, lakes, bogs and mires are, to some extent, compensating for these losses, though mostly on a small scale.

The extent of sand dunes has fallen by 40% this century, mainly in along the western shores of Europe; a third of the loss has occurred since mid 1970s.
The main causes are urbanisation, recreational use and forest plantation.

The total area of forest is increasing, as is total timber production. "Extensive" forest management, formerly the most common practice, continues to be replaced by more intensive and uniform management.
The use of exotic species is still increasing.
The severe loss of old natural and semi-natural woodlands has continued.
Most of the old and almost untouched forests are now to be found in CEE and the NIS, although smaller areas still exist elsewhere.
Forest fires are still a problem around the Mediterranean, though there has been a decrease in the area affected.
The concept of sustainable forestry is beginning to be introduced in forest use and management, but general effects on biodiversity have yet to be seen.

As agriculture has become more intensive and afforestation has continued in low-yielding areas, semi- natural agricultural habitats such as meadows are rapidly being lost or degraded.
These habitats were formerly very widespread in Europe and depended on extensive agricultural management with low inputs of nutrients.
They now suffer from excessive nutrient input and acidification.
With the disappearance of their often very rich plant and animal life, the natural biodiversity of the open landscape has severely diminished.

A wide range of initiatives and legal instruments for the protection of species and habitats has been introduced internationally and nationally in all countries.
All these have succeeded in protecting considerable land and sea areas and saving a number of species and habitats, but implementation is often difficult and slow and has not been able to counteract the general decline.
At European level, the implementation of the Natura 2000 network of designated sites in the EU, and the upcoming EMERALD network under the Bern Convention in the rest of Europe, are currently the most important initiatives.

Overall, the conservation of biodiversity is often regarded as less important than the shorter-term economic or social interests of the sectors influencing it most heavily.
A major obstacle to securing conservation goals remains the need to incorporate biodiversity concerns into other policy areas.
Strategic Environmental Assessments for policies and programmes, together with nature conservation instruments, can be important tools for enhancing such integration.

Figure

Bird status 

Inland waters 

There has been a general reduction in total water abstraction in many countries since 1980.
In most countries, industrial abstraction has been falling slowly since 1980 because of the shift away from industries that are heavy users of water, the growth of services, technical improvements and increased recycling.
However, demand around urban areas may still exceed availability and, in the near future, water shortages may occur.
Future water supply may also be affected by climate change.

Agriculture is the most important user of water in Mediterranean countries, mainly for irrigation.
The area under irrigation and the abstraction of water for irrigation have been rising steadily since 1980.
In southern European countries, 60% of all water abstracted is used for irrigation.
In some regions, groundwater abstraction is exceeding the recharge rate, causing lowering of the groundwater table, loss of wetlands and seawater intrusion.
Tools for limiting future demand for water include improvements in the efficiency of water use, price controls and agricultural policy.

Despite the introduction of water quality targets in the EU and the attention to water quality in the Environmental Action Programme for Central and Eastern Europe, there has been no overall improvement of river quality since 1989/90.

European countries report different trends without any consistent geographical pattern.
There have been some improvements in the most seriously polluted rivers, however, since the 1970s.

Phosphorus and nitrogen continue to cause eutrophication of surface waters.
Improvements in waste-water treatment and reductions in emissions from large industries between 1980 and 1995 resulted in total discharges of phosphorus into rivers falling by between 40% and 60% in several countries.
Phosphorus concentrations in surface waters decreased significantly, particularly in those previously most severely affected.
Further improvements are expected since the recovery time, particularly of lakes, may be several years.
Phosphorous concentrations at about a quarter of the river monitoring sites are still about ten times higher than those in water of good quality.
Nitrogen, of which the main source is agriculture, is less of a problem in rivers, but can cause problems when transported to the sea; emissions need to be further controlled to protect the marine environment.

Groundwater quality is affected by increasing concentrations of nitrate and pesticides from agriculture.
Nitrate concentrations are low in northern Europe, but high in several Western and Eastern countries, with frequent exceedances of the EU maximum admissible concentration.

The application of pesticides in the EU fell between 1985 and 1995, but this does not necessarily indicate a decrease in environmental impact since the range of pesticides in use has changed.
Groundwater concentrations of certain pesticides frequently exceed EU maximum admissible concentrations.
Significant pollution from heavy metals, hydrocarbons and chlorinated hydrocarbons has also been reported from many countries.

Integrated polices for the protection of inland waters are in place in many areas of Europe, for example around the North Sea, the Baltic Sea, the Rhine, the Elbe and the Danube.

Although much has been achieved, better integration of environmental policies with economic policies remains a challenge for the future.

Agricultural policy, in particular, will be the key for tackling inputs from diffuse sources, but this continues to be both technically and politically difficult.
Although reform under the Common Agricultural Policy of the European Union is being used to integrate measures to reduce nutrient inputs, more will have to be done for example, to ensure that policies such as setting aside agricultural land are designed to maximise environmental benefits.

The EU Urban Waste Water Treatment and Nitrate Directives should deliver substantial quality improvements, but their success depends on the extent to which Member States designate sensitive areas and vulnerable zones.
The proposal for a Water Framework Directive will require integrated programmes of management and improvement.
If implemented in a comparable way across the EU, this Directive, coupled with a further switch to demand-side management, should lead to marked improvements in water quality and to the sustainable management of water resources.

Figure

Freshwater availability in Europe

Marine and coastal environment 

The most threatened seas are the North Sea (over-fishing, high nutrient and pollutant concentrations), the Iberian seas (i.e. the part of the Atlantic along the eastern Atlantic shelf, including the Bay of Biscay:
over-fishing, heavy metals), the Mediterranean sea (locally high nutrient concentrations, high pressure on the coasts, over-fishing), the Black Sea (over-fishing, rapid increase of nutrient concentrations) and the Baltic Sea (high nutrient concentrations, pollutants, over-fishing).

Eutrophication, mainly resulting from nutrient surpluses in agriculture, is of major concern in some parts of many European seas.
Nutrient concentrations are generally at the same level as in the beginning of the 1990s.

Increases in nitrogen discharges and resulting concentrations in sea water on some of the west coasts of Europe seem to be correlated with high precipitation and flooding between 1994 and 1996.
In most other seas, no clear trend in nutrient concentrations could be identified.
However, concentrations of nutrients in the Black Sea, mainly originating from the Danube watershed, increased about tenfold between 1960 and 1992.

Contamination of sediments and biota by anthropogenic chemicals seems to be common in almost all European seas.

Only limited data was available, mainly covering western and north-western Europe.
Elevated concentrations (above natural background) of heavy metals and PCBs have been found in fish and sediment, with high levels near point sources of emission.
Bio-accumulation of these substances may pose a threat to ecosystems and human health (as discussed in the chapter on chemicals).

The overall picture of oil pollution is highly fragmentary, and no reliable assessment of general trends can be made.
The main source is from land, reaching the seas through rivers.
Although the annual number of oil spills is falling, small and occasional large spills in zones of heavy boat traffic are causing significant local damage, primarily smothering of beaches and seabirds and impairment of harvest of fish and shellfish.
There is, however, no evidence of irrevocable damage to marine ecosystems, either from major spills or from chronic sources of oil.

Many seas continue to be heavily over-fished, with particularly serious problems in the North Sea, the Iberian seas, the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.
There is a critical over-capacity in the fishing fleet, and a reduction of 40% in capacity would be needed to match available fish resources.

Figure

Nitrogen and phosphorus discharges 

Soil degradation 

Over 300 000 potentially contaminated sites have been identified in Western Europe, and the estimated total number in Europe is much greater.

Although the Environmental Programme for Europe called for the identification of contaminated sites, a complete overview is not yet available for many countries.
The extent of the problem is difficult to assess because of the lack of agreed definitions.
The European Commission is preparing a White Paper on environmental liability; follow-up actions might require agreed definitions.
Most Western European countries have established regulatory frameworks aimed at preventing future incidents and cleaning up existing contamination.

In Eastern Europe, soil contamination around abandoned military bases poses the most serious risk.
The majority of the countries in the region have started to assess the problems involved.
However, many CEE countries and the NIS have still to develop the regulatory and financial framework needed for dealing with contaminated sites.

Another severe problem is soil loss through sealing under constructions, such as industrial premises and transport infrastructure, reducing soil use options for future generations.

Soil erosion is increasing.
About 115 million hectares are suffering from water erosion and 42 million hectares from wind erosion.
The problem is greatest in the Mediterranean region because of its fragile environmental conditions, but problems exist in most European countries.
Soil erosion is intensified by land abandonment and forest fires, particularly in marginal areas.
Strategies, such as afforestation, for combating accelerated soil erosion are lacking in many areas.

Soil salinisation is affecting nearly 4 million hectares, mainly in Mediterranean and Eastern European countries.

The main causes are over-exploitation of water resources as a result of irrigation for agriculture, population increase, industrial and urban development and the expansion of tourism in coastal areas.
The main effects in cultivated areas are lower crop yields and even total crop failure.
Strategies to combat soil salinisation are lacking in many countries.

Soil erosion and salinisation have increased the risk of desertification in the most vulnerable areas, particularly in the Mediterranean region.
Information on the extent and severity of desertification is limited; further work is needed on prevention strategies, possibly within the framework of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.

Available data on the number of certain and potentially contaminated sites.
