
The End of Nature versus Nurture

Is human behavior determined by genetics or by environment? 
It may be time to abandon the dichotomy.

The defenders of nature and nurture have been at each other's throats for as long as I can remember.
Whereas biologists have always believed that genes have something to do with human behavior, social scientists have flocked en masse to the opposite position:
that we are fully and entirely our own creation, free from the chains of biology.

I felt the heat of this debate in the 1970s whenever, in lectures for general audiences, I mentioned sex differences in chimpanzees, such as that males are more aggressive and more ambitious than females.
There would be howls of protest. 
Wasn't I projecting my own values onto these poor animals? 
How rigorous were my methods?
Why did I even bother to compare the sexes?
Did I perhaps have a hidden agenda? 

Nowadays the same sort of information makes people yawn! 
Even direct comparisons between human and ape behavior, something that used to be taboo, fail to get anyone excited. 
Everyone has heard that men are from Mars and women from Venus.
Everyone has seen, in Time and Newsweek , PET scans of the human brain engaged in various tasks, with different areas lighting up in male and female brains.

This time, however, it is my turn to be troubled.
Instead of celebrating the victory of the biological approach, I regard some of the contemporary dichotomies between men and women as gross simplifications rendered politically correct by a fashionable amount of male-bashing (for example, when normal hormonal effects are referred to as "testosterone poisoning"). 
We remain as far removed as ever from a sophisticated understanding of the interplay between genes and environment. 
Society has let the pendulum swing wildly back from nurture to nature, leaving behind a number of bewildered social scientists. 
Yet we still love to phrase everything in terms of one influence or the other, rather than both.

It is impossible to explore where we may be heading 50 years from now without looking back an equal number of years at the charged history of the nature/nurture controversy.
The debate is so emotional because any stance one takes comes with serious political implications.
Positions have ranged from an unfounded faith in human flexibility by reformists to an obsession with blood and race by conservatives.
Each in their own way, these positions have caused incalculable human suffering in the past century.

Figure 1

Twins reared apart have been studied for clues about the relative contributions of genes and environment to human behavior

These brothers rediscovered each other later in life when both were mustachioed firefighters.

Learning and Instinct

Fifty years ago the two dominant schools of thought about animal and human behavior had opposite outlooks.
Teaching animals arbitrary actions such as lever-pressing, American behaviorists came to view all behavior as the product of trial-and-error learning. 
This process was considered so universal that differences among species were irrelevant:
learning applied to all animals, including humans.
As B. F. Skinner, the founder of behaviorism, bluntly put it: "Pigeon, rat, monkey, which is which?
It doesn't matter." In contrast, the ethological school in Europe focused on naturalistic behavior.
Each animal species is born with a number of so-called fixed-action patterns that undergo little modification by the environment. 
These and other species-specific behaviors represent evolutionary adaptations.
Thus, no one needs to teach humans how to laugh or cry:
these are innate signals, universally used and understood.
Similarly, the spider does not need to learn how to construct a web.
She is born with a battery of spinnerets (spinning tubes connected to silk glands) as well as a behavioral program that "instructs" her how to weave threads together.

Because of their simplicity, both views of behavior had enormous appeal.
And although both paid homage to evolution, they sometimes did so in a superficial, arm-waving sort of way. 
Behaviorists stressed the continuities between humans and other animals, attributing these to evolution.
But because for them behavior was learned rather than inborn, they ignored the genetic side, which is really what evolution is all about.
While it is true that evolution implies continuity, it also implies diversity:
each animal is adapted to a specific way of life in a specific environment.
As is evident from Skinner's statement, this point was blithely ignored. 

Similarly, some ethologists had rather vague evolutionary notions, emphasizing phylogenetic descent rather than the processes of natural selection.
They saw behavioral traits, such as the inhibition of aggression, as good for the species.
The argument was that if animals were to kill one another in fights, the species would not survive.
This may be true, but animals have perfectly selfish reasons to avoid the escalation of fights that may harm themselves and their relationships.
Hence, these ideas have now been replaced by theories about how traits benefit the actor and its kin; effects on the species as a whole are considered a mere by-product.

Behaviorism started losing its grip with the discovery that learning is not the same for all situations and all species. 
For example, a rat normally links actions with effects only if the two immediately follow each other.
So it would be very slow to learn to press a bar if a reward followed minutes later.
When it comes to food that makes it sick, however, a delay of hours between consumption and the negative sensation still induces future food aversion.
Apparently, animals are specialized learners, being best at those contingencies that are most important for survival.

At the same time that behaviorists were forced to adopt the premises of evolutionary biology and to consider the world outside the laboratory, ethologists and ecologists were laying the groundwork for the neo-Darwinian revolution of the 1970s. 
The pioneer here was Dutch ethologist Nikolaas Tinbergen, who conducted ingenious field experiments on the survival value of animal behavior.
He understood, for instance, why many birds remove eggshells from the nest after the chicks have hatched. 
Because the outside of a shell is colored for camouflage but the inside is not, predators such as crows easily locate eggs if broken shells are placed next to them.
Throwing out the pieces is an automatic response favored by natural selection because the birds that practice this behavior have more surviving offspring.

Others developed theories to explain behavior that at first sight does not seem to help the actor but someone else.
Such "altruism" can be seen in ant soldiers giving their lives in defense of their colony or in dolphins lifting a drowning companion to the surface.
Biologists assumed that natural selection will allow for assistance among relatives as a means of promoting the same genes.
Or, if two animals are unrelated, the favor granted by one must be returned at some future time. 

The scientists felt so confident about their explanations of cooperative animal societies that they could not resist extending these ideas to our own species.
They saw the hugely cooperative enterprise of human society as based on the same premise of family values and economic tit-for-tat.

It fell to an American expert on ants, Edward O. Wilson, to deliver the news in 1975 that a great deal of human behavior was ripe for the Darwinian perspective and that the social sciences should prepare themselves to work together with biologists on this endeavor.
Thus far the two disciplines had led separate lives, but from the perspective of a biologist social science is not much more than the study of animal behavior focused on a single species: ours.
Because this is not how social scientists see their work, proposals for a united framework were not kindly received.
One of Wilson's outraged opponents even poured cold water over Wilson's head after he gave a lecture. 
For reasons explained below, his new synthesis, dubbed "sociobiology," was equated with race policies of the past and ultimately with the Holocaust.

Although the criticism was patently unfair- Wilson was offering evolutionary explanations, not policy suggestions-we shouldn't be surprised that the topic of human biology arouses strong emotions.

Figure 2

Danger comes from extremes of both positions-the biological determinism of the Nazis and the social engineering of the Communists

Burdens of the Past

It is generally believed that some human behavior can easily be changed because it is learned, whereas other behavior resists modification because it is part of our biological heritage.

Ideologues of all colors have grasped this division to argue for the innate nature of certain human characteristics (for example, purported race differences in intelligence) and the plasticity of others (such as the ability to overcome gender stereotypes).
Thus, Communism was founded on great confidence in human malleability.
Because people, unlike social insects, resist submerging individuality for the greater good, some regimes accompanied their revolutions with massive indoctrination efforts. 
All of this proved in vain, however.
Communism went under because of an economic incentive structure that was out of touch with human nature.
Unfortunately, it did so only after having caused great misery and death.

Even more disastrous was the embrace of biology by Nazi Germany.
Here, too, the collective ( das Volk ) was placed above the individual, but instead of relying on social engineering the method of choice was genetic manipulation. 
People were classified into "superior" and "inferior" types, the first of which needed to be protected against contamination by the second.
In the horrible medical language of the Nazis, a healthy Volk required the cutting out of all "cancerous" elements.
This idea was followed to its extreme in a manner that Western civilization has vowed never to forget.
Don't think that the underlying selectionist ideology was restricted to this particular time and place, however. 
In the early part of the 20th century, the eugenics movement-which sought to improve humanity by "breeding from the fitter stocks"-enjoyed widespread appeal among intellectuals in both the U.S. and Great Britain.
Based on ideas going back to Plato's Republic , sterilization of the mentally handicapped and of criminals was considered perfectly acceptable.
And social Darwinism- the idea that in a laissez-faire capitalist economy the strong will outcompete the weak, resulting in general improvement of the population-still inspires political agendas today.
In this view, the poor should not be aided in their struggle for existence so as not to upset the natural order. 

Given these ideologies, it is understandable why suppressed categories of people, such as minorities and women, fail to see biology as a friend.
I would argue, however, that the danger comes from both directions, from biological determinism as well as its opposite, the denial of basic human needs and the belief that we can be everything we want to be.
The hippie communes of the 1960s, the Israeli kibbutzim and the feminist revolution all sought to redefine humans.
But denial of sexual jealousy, the parent-child bond or gender differences can be carried only so far before a counter-movement will seek to balance cultural trends with evolved human inclinations.

What makes the present era different is that the genocide of World War II is fading into memory while at the same time the evidence for a connection between genes and behavior is mounting. 
Studies of twins reared apart have reached the status of common knowledge, and almost every week newspapers report a new human gene.
There is evidence for genes involved in schizophrenia, epilepsy and Alzheimer's and even in common behavioral traits such as thrill-seeking.
We are also learning more about genetic and neurological differences between men and women, as well as between gay and straight men.
For example, a small region of the brain in transsexual men (who dress and behave like women) resembles the same region in women's brains.

The list of such scientific advances is getting longer by the day, resulting in a critical mass of evidence that is impossible to ignore.
Understandably, academics who have spent their life condemning the idea that biology influences human behavior are reluctant to change course.
But they are being overtaken by the general public, which seems to have accepted that genes are involved in just about everything we do and are.
Concurrently resistance to comparisons with other animals has dissipated because of a stream of television nature programs that has brought exotic wildlife into our homes while showing animals to be quite a bit smarter and more interesting than people used to believe.

Studies of chimpanzees and bonobos, such as those by Jane Goodall and myself, show that countless human practices and potentials, from politics and child-rearing to violence and even morality, have parallels in the lives of our closest animal relatives. 
How can we maintain the dualisms of the past-between humans and animals and between body and mind-in the face of all this evidence to the contrary?
Current knowledge about our biological background simply doesn't permit a return to the tabula rasa views of the past.

This doesn't solve the problem of ideological abuse, however. 
If anything, it makes things worse.
So long as people have political agendas, they will depict human nature one way or another for their own purposes.
Conservatives like to point out that people are naturally selfish, whereas liberals argue that we have evolved to be social and cooperative. 
The obvious correctness of both inferences goes to show what is wrong with simpleminded genetic determinism.

Figure 3

Our closest animal relatives-such as this bonobo family-share many human behaviors

Television nature programs have brought home to the general public the lesson of biology's influence on behavior. 

The Best of Both Worlds

Because genetic language ("a gene for x") plays into our sound-bite culture, there is all the more reason to educate the public that genes, by themselves, are like seeds dropped onto the pavement:
powerless to produce anything.
When scientists say that a trait is inherited, all they mean is that part of its variability is explained by genetic factors.
That the environment usually explains at least as much tends to be forgotten.

As Hans Kummer, a Swiss primatologist, remarked years ago, to try to determine how much of a trait is produced by genes and how much by the environment is as useless as asking whether the drumming that we hear in the distance is made by the percussionist or by his instrument.
On the other hand, if we pick up distinct sounds on different occasions, we can legitimately ask whether the variation is caused by different drummers or by different drums.
This is the only sort of question science addresses when it looks into genetic versus environmental effects.

I foresee a continued mapping of the links between genes and behavior, a much more precise knowledge of how the brain works and a gradual adoption of the evolutionary paradigm in the social sciences.
Charles Darwin's portrait will finally decorate the walls of departments of psychology and sociology! 
But one would hope that all of this will be accompanied by continued assessment of the ethical and political implications of behavioral science.

Traditionally, scientists have acted as if it is none of their business how the information they produce is being used. 
During some periods they have even actively assisted in political abuse.
One notable exception was, of course, Albert Einstein, who may serve as a model of the kind of moral awareness needed in the behavioral and social sciences.
If history teaches us anything, it is that it is critical that we remain on the alert against misinterpretations and simplifications. 
No one is in a better position than the scientists themselves to warn against distortions and to explain the complexities. 

In which direction the thinking may develop can perhaps be illustrated with an example from the crossroads between cultural and evolutionary anthropology.
Sigmund Freud and many traditional anthropologists, such as Claude Lévi-Strauss, have assumed that the human incest taboo serves to suppress sexual urges between family members.
Freud believed that "the earliest sexual excitations of youthful human beings are invariably of an incestuous character." Hence, the incest taboo was seen as the ultimate victory of culture over nature.

In contrast, Edward Westermarck, a Finnish sociologist who lived at about the same time as Freud, hypothesized that early familiarity (such as between mother and child and between siblings) kills sexual desire.
Little or no sexual attraction is found, he argued, between individuals who have grown up together. 
A fervent Darwinian, Westermarck proposed this as an evolved mechanism designed to prevent the deleterious consequences of inbreeding.

In the largest-scale study on this issue to date, Arthur P. Wolf, an anthropologist at Stanford University, examined the marital histories of 14,400 women in a "natural experiment" carried out in Taiwan.
Families in this region used to adopt and raise future daughters-in- law, which meant that intended marriage partners grew up together from early childhood.
Wolf compared these marriages with those arranged between men and women who did not meet until the wedding day.
Using divorce and fertility rates as gauges of marital happiness and sexual activity, respectively, the data strongly supported the Westermarck effect:
association in the first years of life appeared to compromise adult marital compatibility.
Nonhuman primates are subject to the same mechanism.
Many primates prevent inbreeding through migration of one sex or the other at puberty.
The migratory sex meets new, unrelated mates, whereas the resident sex gains genetic diversity from the outside.
But close kin who stay together also generally avoid sexual intercourse.

Kisaburo Tokuda first observed this in a group of Japanese macaques at the Kyoto zoo in the 1950s.
A young adult male that had risen to the top rank made full use of his sexual privileges, mating frequently with all the females except for one: his mother.
This was not an isolated case:
mother-son matings are strongly suppressed in all primates. 
Even in bonobos-probably the most sexually active primates on the earth-this is the one partner combination in which sex is extremely rare or absent.
Incest avoidance has now been convincingly demonstrated in a host of primates, and the mediating mechanism is thought to be early familiarity.

The Westermarck effect serves as a showcase for Darwinian approaches to human behavior because it so clearly rests on a combination of nature and nurture.
The framework includes a developmental component (learned sexual aversion), an innate component (the effect of early familiarity), a cultural component (some cultures raise unrelated children together, others raise siblings of the opposite sex apart, but most have family arrangements that automatically lead to sexual inhibitions among relatives), a sound evolutionary reason (suppression of inbreeding) and direct parallels with animal behavior.
On top of this comes the cultural taboo, which is unique to our species.
An intriguing question is whether the incest taboo merely serves to formalize and strengthen the Westermarck effect or whether it adds a substantially new dimension.

The unexpected richness of a research program that integrates developmental, genetic, evolutionary and cultural approaches to a well-circumscribed phenomenon demonstrates the power of breaking down old barriers between disciplines.
Most likely what will happen in the next millennium is that evolutionary approaches to human behavior will become more and more sophisticated by explicitly taking cultural flexibility into account.
Hence, the traditional either/or approach to learning and instinct will be replaced by a more integrated perspective.
In the meantime, students of animal behavior will become more interested in environmental effects on behavior and especially-in animals such as primates and marine mammals-the possibility of cultural transmission of information and habits.
For example, some chimpanzee communities use stones to crack nuts in the forest, whereas other communities have the same nuts and stones available but don't do anything with them.
Such differences are unexplained by genetic variation.

These two developments together will weaken the dichotomies popular today to the point of eliminating them.
Rather than looking at culture as the antithesis of nature, we will be gaining a much more profound understanding of human behavior by silently carrying the old nature/nurture debate to its grave. 
