
Genetics and Cancer

CHAPTER CONCEPTS

Cancer is now recognized as a genetic disorder at the cellular level that involves the mutation of a small number of genes.
Many of there genes normally act to suppress or stimulate progression through the cell cycle, and loss or inactivation of these genes causes uncontrolled cell division and tumor formation.
Environmental factors and viruses also play a role in the genetic alterations that are necessary to transform normal cells into cancerous cells.

Although often viewed as a single disease, cancer is actually a complex group of diseases affecting a wide range of cells and tissues.
A genetic link to cancer was first proposed early in the twentieth century, and this idea has served as one of the foundations of cancer research.
Mutations that alter the genome or gene expression are now regarded as a common feature of all cancers.
In some cases, such mutations are part of the germ line and are inherited.
More often, mutations arise in somatic cells and are not passed on to future generations through the germ cells.
Sometimes, the inherited mutation must be accompanied by a somatic mutation at the homologous locus, creating homozygosity.
Whichever the case, cancer is now considered a genetic disorder at the cellular 1eve1 .

Genomic alterations associated with cancer can involve small-scale changes such as a single nucleotide substitution or large-scale events that include chromosome rearrangement, chromosome gain or loss, or even the integration of viral genomes into chromosomal sites.
Large-scale genomic alterations are a common feature of cancer; the majority of human tumors are characterized by visible chromosomal changes.
Some of these chromosomal changes, particularly in leukemia, are so characteristic they can be used to diagnose and classify the disorder and to make accurate predictions about the severity and course of the disease.

Familial forms of cancer have been known for over two hundred years.
In many of these cases, no well- defined pattern of inheritance can be established.
In a small number of cases, however, a Mendelian pattern of dominant or recessive inheritance can be established, indicating the hereditary nature of the cancer.

Because mutation is the underlying cause of cancer, there will always be a baseline rate of cancer, because there is a background rate of spontaneous mutation.
Over and above this baseline rate, environmental agents that promote mutation also play a role in the development of cancer.
Environmental factors such as ionizing radiation, chemicals, and viruses are cancer-causing agents, and almost all of these act by generating mutations.
Given that mutations play a role in cancer, this chapter will explore answers to a series of questions about how mutations convert normal cells into malignant tumors, which mutant genes are most likely to result in cancer, and how many mutations are required to cause cancer.

One approach to answering these questions is to consider what properties of cancer cells distinguish them from normal cells and to ask what genes control these properties.
Cancer cells have two properties in common:
(1) uncontrolled growth and
(2) the ability to spread or metastasize from their original site to other locations in the body.
Cell division is the result of cells traversing the cell cycle; in cancer cells, control over the cell cycle is lost, and cells proliferate rapidly.
Investigations into the genetic control of the cell cycle are now providing in- sights into the origins of cancer.

The metastasis of cancer cells is controlled by gene products that become localized on the cell surface, and the genetics of metastasis is related to an understanding of how cells interact with the extracellular matrix and with other cells through cell surface molecules.
Though this field is less well developed than the study of the cell cycle, it is beginning to provide some insights into the secondary events in tumor progression. 

This chapter will consider the relationship between genes and cancer, with emphasis on the relationship between the cell cycle and genetic disorders associated with cancer.
We will also examine the relationship between mutation and cancer, the identification of genes that when mutated, initiate the transformation of cells, and estimate the number of mutations involved in tumor formation.
We will also discuss the relationship between chromosomal changes and cancer, and the role of environmental agents in the genesis of cancer.

The Cell Cycle and Cancer

As described in Chapter 2, the cell cycle represents the sequence of events occurring between mitotic divisions in a eukaryotic cell.
In years past, work on control of the cell cycle has been conducted mainly by two groups:
(1) geneticists working with yeasts, especially Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe ; and
(2) develop- mental biologists, studying the newly fertilized eggs of organisms such as frogs, sea urchins, and newts.

In the last few years, these groups have succeeded in identifying and characterizing genes involved in the cell cycle, and their work is now converging and overlapping with important areas of cancer biology, particularly studies on growth factors and the genes that suppress or promote tumor formation.
This convergence has had a synergistic effect, resulting in new insights into the processes that control cell division and how regulation of the cell cycle is coupled to the transcription of selected genes. 
Because of these recent developments, it is necessary to spend some time describing what is known about the steps of the cell cycle and the genes that regulate progression through the cycle.
We will then undertake a discussion of the genetics of cancer.

The Cell Cycle

Stripped to its essentials, the cell cycle progresses from a period of chromosomal DNA replication (S phase) to the segregation of chromosomes into two nuclei during mitosis (M phase).
Interspersed between these stages are two gaps, called G1 and G2.
Together, G1, S, and G2 make up the interphase portion of the cell cycle (Figure 21.1).
The Gl stage begins after mitosis; synthesis of many cytoplasmic elements including ribosomes, enzymes, and membrane-derived organelles occurs at this time. 
In the S phase, DNA replication takes place, producing a duplicate copy of each chromosome.
Then a second period of growth and synthesis known as G2 occurs as a prelude to mitosis. 

Because mitosis occurs rapidly, usually lasting less than an hour, cells spend most of the cell cycle in interphase.
However, the duration of the cell cycle (the time between mitotic divisions) can vary widely among cells in the life cycle of an organism and among different cell types in the same organism. 
For example, animal cells exhibit in vivo cycles ranging from a few minutes to several months.
Most of this variation can be traced to the time spent in G1.
The time necessary to complete S and G2 remains relatively constant in most cell types.

While some cells such as meristematic cells in plants and dermal cells in human skin cycle continuously, other cell types, including many nerve cells, withdraw from the Gl phase, and permanently enter a nondividing state known as G0.
Still other cell types such as white blood cells can be recruited to return from G0 and reenter the cell cycle.

Taken together, these observations suggest that the cell cycle is tightly regulated and is dependent on the life history and differentiated state of a given cell.
A great deal of information about the regulation of the cell cycle has become available in the last few years.
A summary of what is currently known about the genetic regulation of the cell cycle will serve as a prelude to an overview of the genetics of cancer. 

Checkpoints and Control of the Cell Cycle

As work on the cell cycle in several organisms has con- verged, a universal model of the cell cycle and its regulation is beginning to emerge.
Although details of all molecular events or even the exact number and sequence of steps are not yet known, all eukaryotic cells probably employ a common series of biochemical pathways to regulate events in the cell cycle. 
If the universal aspect of the current model of the cell cycle is upheld, results gathered from the study of yeasts or clam eggs can be used to understand and predict events in normal human cells and in mutated cells that have become cancerous. 
As a result, discoveries in cell cycle research will probably continue to be fast-moving and spectacular.

The emerging picture indicates that the cell cycle is regulated at the G2/M transition and at a point within G1.
Events at the G2tM transition have been well documented, but the regulatory point within late G1, several hours before the initiation of S phase, is not yet well characterized.

At each of these points, a decision is made to proceed or halt progression through the cell cycle.
This decision is controlled through the interaction of two classes of proteins. 
One is a group of enzymes called protein kinases that selectively phosphorylate target proteins.
Although a large number of different protein kinases exist in the cell, only a few are involved in regulation of the cell cycle.
In the second group, proteins involved in controlling progression through the cell cycle are called cyclins .
These proteins, first identified in the embryos of developing invertebrates, are synthesized and degraded in a synchronous pattern throughout the cell cycle (Figure 21.2). 
Several cyclins, including C, D1,D2, and E, accumulate during the G1 phase, with only D1 persisting after the S phase. 
Cyclin A accumulates during late S and persists until the G2/M transition; cyclin B accumulates during G2 and persists until the end of M.
Coupling of a kinase and a cyclin produces a regulatory molecule that controls the movement of the cell from G2 into M and from G1 into S.

The onset of M in most enkaryotic cells is controlled by a kinase called CDK1 (cyclin-dependent kinase), which was biochemically characterized in maturing amphibian eggs and genetically identified in yeast as the product of the cdc2 gene.
This protein has a highly conserved sequence in all enkaryotes examined; its function is necessary for entry into M phase.

Several events mark the entry from G2 into mitosis (M), including condensation of the chromatin to form chromosomes, breakdown of the nuclear membrane, and reorganization of the cytoskeleton.
Major events in this transition are regulated by the formation of an active CDKl/cyclin B complex.
When bound to cyclin B, the CDK1 component catalyzes phosphorylation, which brings about nuclear membrane breakdown and rearrangement of the cytoskeleton.
It also phosphorylates histone H1, which may play a role in chromatin condensation (Figure 21.3). 
The function of cyclin B in this complex is not clear, but it may control the cellular localization or target molecule specificity.
Although several lines of experiments suggest that cyclin A is also involved in the progression from G2 to M, its functions are not clearly understood.

While the action of the B cyclin and CDK1 are responsible for passage into M, it appears that several cyclins, including D and E, can move cells from G1 into S.
Experiments indicate that the CDK1 kinase is also active in phosphorylation in G1, but that instead of combining with cyclin B (which is not present), CDK1 combines with G1 cyclins, directing the phosphorylation of G1 stage-specific protein substrates.

Altogether, almost a dozen different cyclins have been identified, and a growing number of cyclin-dependent kinases are being described, indicating that multiple control points in the cell cycle exist, or that these kinases and cyclins have multiple functions.

Cell-Cycle Regulation and Cancer 

Mutations that disrupt any step in cell cycle regulation are candidates for the study of cancer-causing genes.
For example, mutations in genes that encode the kinases and cyclins may be important in generating malignant transformation in cells.
Evidence is accumulating that the Gl checkpoint is aberrant in many forms of cancer, and mutant G1 cyclins and kinases are thought to be the best candidates for cancer-promoting genes.
Recently, a form of cyclin D called D1 has been shown to be identical to a gene product that is overexpressed in certain forms of leukemia.

The next section summarizes what is known about the genetics of selected cancers and, wherever possible, relates this in formation to what has been discovered about the cell cycle and its regulation. 

Genes and cancer

Genetic studies of several different cancers have identified a small number of genes that must be mutated in order to trigger the development of cancer or maintain the growth of malignant cells.
It is clear that the two main properties of cancer, uncontrolled cell division and the ability to spread or metastasize, are the result of genetic alterations.
As mentioned previously, these alterations can involve large-scale genomic instability, resulting in chromosome loss, rearrangement, or the insertion of foreign (often viral) DNA sequences into loci on human chromosomes. 
Smaller-scale alterations, such as changes in a nucleotide sequence, or more subtle modifications that alter only the amount of a gene product that is present or the time over which the gene product is active may also be involved.
Two interrelated questions arise from considering cancer as a genetic disorder at the cellular level:
(1) Are there mutant alleles that predispose an organism or specific cell types to cancer, and
(2) if so, how many mutational events are necessary to cause cancer?


Genes That Predispose to Cancer 

Single genes do indeed predispose cells to becoming malignant, and it is possible to identify families in which certain forms of cancer are inherited.
Many studies have documented families with high frequencies of certain types of cancer, such as breast, colon, or kidney cancers.
In most cases, however, it is difficult to identify a clear, simple pattern of inheritance. 
One example of such a predisposition is the inheritance of retinoblastoma (RB) , a cancer of the retinal cells of the eye.
Retinoblastoma occurs with a frequency that ranges from 1 in 14,000 to 1 in 20,000, and most often appears between the ages of 1 and 3 years.
Two forms of retinoblastoma are known.
One is a familial form (about 40 percent of all cases) inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, though the mutation itself is recessive, which will be explained below. 
Because the trait is dominant, those who inherit the mutant RB allele (50 percent of family members) are predisposed to develop eye tumors, and in fact, 90 percent of these individuals will develop retinal tumors, usually in both eyes.
In addition, those family members who inherit the mutant allele are predisposed to developing other forms of cancer, such as osteosarcoma, a bone cancer, even if they do not develop retinoblastoma. 

Table 21.1

Dominantly Inherited Predispositions to Tumors

Tumor Predisposition Gene.
Chromosome .


Early onset familial breast cancer.
17q.


Familial adenomatous polyposis.
5q.


Familial melanoma.
9p.


Gorlin syndrome.
9p.


Heredirary nonpolyposis colon cancer.
2p.


Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
17p.


Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 1.
11q.


Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2.
22q.


Neurofibromatous, type 1.
17q.


Neurofibromatous, type 2.
22q.


Retinoblastoma.
13q.


von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.
3p.


Wilms tumor.
llp.


A second form of retinoblastoma is also known, amounting to 60 percent of all cases.
This form is not familial, and tumors develop spontaneously.
The sporadic form is characterized by the appearance of tumors only in one eye, and onset occurs at a much later age than in the familial form.

Other types of dominantly inherited familial cancer are also known (Table 21.1).
These include Wilms tumor (WT) , a cancer of the kidney inherited as an autosomal dominant condition, and Li-Fraumeni syndrome , a rare autosomal dominant condition that predisposes to a number of different cancers, including breast cancer.

How Many Mutations Are Needed?

The study of genes that predispose an individual to cancer has allowed scientists to estimate the number and sequence of mutational events necessary to trigger different forms of cancer. 
By studying the two different types of retinoblastoma, Alfred Knudson and his colleagues developed a model that requires the presence of two mutated copies of the RB gene in the same retinal cell for tumor development. (i.e., the mutant allele is recessive).
In the familial form, one mutant RB allele is inherited, and is carried by all cells of the body, including cells of the retina (Figure 21.4).
If the normal allele of the RB gene becomes mutated in a retinal cell, formation of retinal tumors will result.
Individuals carrying an inherited mutation of the RB gene are predisposed to develop retinoblastoma, as only one additional mutational event is required to cause tumor formation.
This does not happen in all cases, however; some 10 percent of those inheriting a mutant RB gene do not develop cancer.
This model explains how the mutation itself can act as a recessive trait (both alleles must be inactive to see the mutant phenotype), and how carrying one mutant allele acts as a dominant trait in predisposing an individual to cancer (they need only one additional mutation).

In sporadic cases, two independent mutations of the RB gene must occur in the same retinal cell for a tumor to develop. 
As might be expected, these events are less frequent and occur at a later age, so that sporadic forms of retinoblastoma are more likely to occur in a single eye, and at a later age than familial forms.

Similar studies on the predisposition to other cancers have led to the conclusion that the number of mutations necessary for the development of cancer ranges from 2 to perhaps as many as 20 (Table 21.2).

Table 21.2

Number of Mutations Associated with Some Cancers

Cancer.
Chromosome Sires.
Minimum Number of Mutations Required.


Retinoblastoma.
13q.
2.


Wilms tumor.
11p.
2.


Colon cancer.
5p, 12p, 17p, 18q.
4-5.


Small-cell lung cancer.
3p, llp, 13q, 17p.
10-15.


Tumor Suppressor Genes

(1) by genes that normally function to suppress cell division, and 
(2) by genes that normally function to promote cell division

The first class, called tumor suppressor genes , inactivates or represses passage through the cell cycle and the resulting cell division.
These genes and/or their gene products must be absent or inactive for cell division to take place.
If these genes become permanently inactivated or lost through mutation, control over cell division is lost, and the cell begins to proliferate in an uncontrollable fashion. 

Genes of the second class, called proto-oncogenes , normally function to promote cell division.
These genes can be "off" or "on," and when they are "on," they promote cell division.
To halt cell division, these genes and/or their gene products must be inactivated.
If proto-oncogenes become permanently switched on, then uncontrolled cell division occurs, leading to tumor formation.
The mutant forms of proto-oncogenes are known as oncogenes .

We shall consider some examples of how mutations in tumor suppressor genes can lead to a loss of control over cell division and the development of cancer.
Following that discussion, we will consider proto-oncogenes and oncogenes, how the normal alleles act to regulate cell division, and how the mutant oncogenes work to promote tumor formation.

Figure 21.1

The cell cycle is controlled at two and possibly more checkpoints, one at the G2/M transition, and another in late GI phase before entry into S phase

These checkpoints involve interaction between transitory proteins, called cyclins, and kinases that add phosphate groups to proteins.
Phosphorylation of target proteins triggers a cascade of events allowing progress through the cell cycle.

Figure 21.2

Relative expression times and amounts of cyclins during the cell cycle

D1 accumulates early in G1 and is expressed at a constant level through most of the cycle.
Cyclin C accumulates in G1, reaches a peak, and declines by mid S phase.
Cyclins D2 and E begin accumulating in the last half of G 1, reach a peak just after the beginning of S, and then decline by early G2.
Cyclin A appears in late G1, accumulates through S, reaches a peak in G2, and is degraded rapidiy as M phase begins. 
Cyclin B appears in mid S phase, peaks at the G2/M transition, and is rapidly degraded.

Figure 21.3

FIGURE 21.3 Transition to M from G2 is controlled by CDKI and cyclin B

These molecules interact to form a complex that adds phosphate groups to cellular components that break down the nuclear membrane (lamins A, B, and C). reorganize the cytoskeleton (caldesmon), and initiate chromosome condensation (histone H1). 
Cyclin B may specify cellular localization o r target molecules.
Other cyclins (especially cyclin A) are thought to be involved at this stage, but these functions are not known. 

Figure 21.4

In spontaneous cases of retinoblastoma (left), two mutations in the retinablastoma gene are acquired in a single cell, causing uncontrolled cell growth and division , resulting in tumor formation

In familial cases of retinoblastoma (at right), one mutation is inherited and present in all cells.
A second mutation at the retinoblastoma locus in any retinal cell will result in uncontrolled cell growth and tumor formation. 
