
Vital Data

The Human Genome Project is producing a plethora of information that will illuminate our hidden susceptibilities to disease. The effort could transform medical science. But new dangers are arriving, too

Later this year, if a biotechnology company called Myriad Genetics has its way, thousands of healthy women in the U.S. will hear doubly bad news.
First, a close relative -perhaps a sister- will announce that she has breast cancer.
Second, the patient's physician thinks this particular cancer has probably been caused by a mutation that the healthy relative has an even chance of also carrying.
The patient has been advised to suggest to all her female relatives that they be tested for the mutation.
Women who share it may be urged to consider a prophylactic double mastectomy, as they, too, are likely to develop breast cancer.
How likely?
Hard to say -the mutations have not yet been thoroughly studied- but the likelihood could be as much as 85 percent.

Most people have yet to confront the dilemmas posed by tests for genes associated with serious diseases.
But BRCA1 , the breast cancer gene that Myriad proposes to start testing on a large scale this year, is merely one of what may become dozens that physicians will soon routinely order checked for mutations.
The tests are all, to varying degrees, spin-offs of the Human Genome Project, an audacious 15-year, $3-billion federal effort to analyze the human genetic heritage in its ultimate molecular detail.

Although the project was formally launched only five and a half years ago, progress is outstripping expectations.
Francis S., Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome Research (NCHGR) at the National Institutes of Health, thinks the job might be done "maybe even two years early" -by 2003.
Technologies developed in response to the effort have already quadrupled the rate of discovery of human disease genes, according to NCHGR's estimate.
A medically significant wisp of DNA is now characterized almost every week, and the pace will soon increase again, as the final assault on the genome gets under way.

Eventually, a new gene will be sequenced -that is, have the order of its chemical subunits determined- every hour.

The project was launched because it seemed to promise the best hope for ultimately defeating not only diseases long known to be inherited but also others that have a more subtle link with genes, including cancer.
Yet the road to that genetic nirvana will be a long one.
Early results from one of the most eagerly awaited developments, gene therapy, have been disappointing.
And at least one genome biologist, Daniel W. Drell of the Department of Energy, foresees a "vicious legal evolution" of gene-based patent claims, as corporations frantically seek to lock up sequences of DNA with commercial value.
The commercialization of humankind's common endowment has prompted protests from activists who see it as an affront to natural dignity. 
Meanwhile one prominent geneticist has warned that gene-based therapies will be too expensive for widespread use.

Abuses of the new genome science, on the other hand, have arrived already.
Compelling evidence demonstrates that children, whom genetic counselors agree should not be tested for certain traits, in fact are being tested in substantial numbers, to their likely detriment.

Conversely, because people at risk for a genetic condition are often turned down for either health insurance, life insurance or employment, patients are now declining genetic testing for themselves or their children, even when it would be medically valuable.
Others seek testing under false names.

Leaders of the genome project have acknowledged from the start that human genetics can be used to harm as well as help. 
They have, indeed, made a point of devoting millions of dollars to studying ethical, legal and social questions.
Yet technical gains are close to outrunning the attempts of professional societies and government regulators to guide the technology's use.

Full-Speed Sequencing Ahead

In 1990 planners estimated that finding the sequence of the chemical subunits, or bases, in the whole genome would take several tens of thousands of technician-years. ( Writing down the sequence, using one character for each base, would take 390,000 pages of Scientific American -with no pictures.) Moreover, sequencing, which will reveal the possible functions and locations of the estimated 100,000 human genes along the chromosomes, could not begin right away.

Preliminary prospecting was necessary to describe the lay of heredity's landscape.

Researchers needed a genetic map, essentially a diagram describing how thousands of known marker sequences in the chromosomes separate and recombine between human generations.
They also knew they could not get far without physical maps, which show the order along a chromosome of recognizable sequence tagged sites.
Using a genetic map, a researcher can compare a given condition's pattern of inheritance with that of marker sequences.
That makes it possible to get a quick fix on where a gene that causes the condition might be.

Computers can then pin the reams of data emerging from sequencing machines onto the skeleton provided by tagged sites on a physical map.
The two kinds of map together make it possible to find quickly genes associated with illness.

Even though Congress has provided less than the $200 million a year the genome project sought, fruitful international collaborations have speeded progress.
A good genetic map covering the entire genome was complete by late 1994, and high-quality physical maps now cover 95 percent of the genome.
A physical map with tagged sites spaced every 100,000 bases -the ideal- is expected to be complete this year.
So the time is ripe for a start on full-scale sequencing.

Efforts to sequence the genomes of other organisms have shown how the process can be speeded and the costs lowered.
Several innovative sequencing techniques are now being developed. 
Collins maintains, however, that radically new approaches will not be necessary to meet the 2005 deadline for a human sequence that is 99.9 percent accurate.
Gains in efficiency in the past two years have convinced him that current technology is essentially up to the job.

The Department of Energy, which supports a large part of the U.S. genome project, has several pilot-scale sequencing operations under way.
The first large sequencing program was inaugurated at Britain's Sanger Center at the end of last year, funded by the Wellcome Trust.
Large-scale sequencing in the U.S. is expected to begin this spring.
One likely site is Robert H. Waterston's sequencing center at Washington University.

The oncoming tidal wave of genetic data has not yet affected most people.
That will change.
Workers are now routinely isolating genetic mutations associated with such widespread illnesses as cancer, Alzheimer's disease and some types of cardiovascular disease.
Devising tests for mutations in a known gene has become a comparatively straightforward matter.
Genzyme, a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass., announced this past fall a diagnostic technology that can simultaneously analyze DNA from 500 patients for the presence of 106 different mutations on seven genes.

When enough is known about the effects of mutations, test results can be a medical boon:
they can indicate how likely a person is to develop illnesses and perhaps suggest life-enhancing medical surveillance or therapy.
But learning about the effects of mutations requires lengthy study.
And genetic data can cause immediate and life-sapping harm.
In particular, it can precipitate detrimental psychological changes, and it can open the door to discrimination.

In the past, genetic discrimination has been largely confined to members of families afflicted with rare conditions showing a clear pattern of inheritance.
For example, members of families with Huntington's disease, a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that develops in middle age, have long found it difficult or impossible to obtain health insurance.
So far "a few hundreds" of people who are at risk of future illness because of their genetic makeup are known to have lost jobs or insurance, Collins states.
Most suffered because a family member had been diagnosed with a condition long known to have a genetic basis.
But as the number of genetic tests grows, Collins predicts, "we are going to see it happen on a larger scale, since we're all at risk for something."

What's Your Genotype?

Testing for cancer-associated mutations, for example, is at present carried out only in research studies at large medical centers, because interpreting the results is fraught with uncertainty. 
But some grim facts are clear.
In families with hereditary breast Cancer -which accounts for less than 10 percent of all cases- mutations in the BRCA1 gene confer an 85 percent lifetime risk of the disease, as well as a 45 percent chance of ovarian cancer.
Some women in such families who have learned that they carry a mutated BRCA1 have elected to undergo prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries) -a procedure that may reduce but does not eliminate the risk of cancer.

More uncertainty arises, however, with women who have a mutated BRCA1 gene but do not have a family history of breast cancer.
For them, the danger is uncertain, but it may be smaller.
Nor is it known whether the danger is different for members of different ethnic groups (although Ashkenazi Jews are more likely than others to carry one specific mutation in BRCA1 , and a gene that can cause neurofibromatosis has more severe effects in whites than in blacks). 

These and other uncertainties pose an agonizing treatment dilemma.
The choice between radical surgery and intensive surveillance -in the form of frequent mammograms- might be crucial. 

The recent identification of a second breast cancer gene, BRCA2 , complicates matters even more.

Although further advances in understanding the genome might conceivably one day eliminate such dilemmas, most scientists do not expect them to evaporate in the foreseeable future.

For a woman who has already been diagnosed with breast cancer, the significance of a positive BRCA1 test for treatment is murky.
And even with a negative test result, a woman still faces the same one-in-eight lifetime risk that all women in the U.S. do.
These factors have led the American Society of Human Genetics and the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group, to urge that for now, testing for BRCA1 mutations be carried out only in a research setting. "We will fight any sale of this test before there is consensus on how it should be used," says coalition member Mary Jo Ellis Kahn, a breast cancer survivor with a family history of the disease.

Such caution clashes with commercial agendas.
Myriad Genetics, which is based in Salt Lake City, plans to offer BRCA1 testing by the end of 1996 to all women diagnosed with breast or ovarian cancer and to their close relatives.
If only the diagnosed patients were to accept, that would still be more than 200,000 tests a year.
Peter D., Meldrum, Myriad's president, says his company is studying the risks for different populations.
Collins, though, calls Myriad's plans "potentially premature," because he says he is not sure that enough will be known about the mutations and the treatment options to justify large-scale testing by the end of this year.

OncorMed in Gaithersburg, Md., is already selling BRCA1 testing services for use in research protocols for women at high risk.
What restrictions should be included in those protocols is a question the National Breast Cancer Coalition is now urgently studying.
The company is also testing for mutations associated with a form of colon cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration has historically not regulated genetic testing services.
In January, however, a task force on genetic testing created by the genome program was weighing whether to urge the FDA to limit testing for cancer-associated mutations to research uses until there are sound data on the value of treatment possibilities.

Some women who know that they carry a mutated BRCA1 gene -only dozens, to date- have gone to elaborate lengths to conceal that information from their insurance carriers, says Barbara B. Biesecker of the NCHGR.
One fear is that insurers will classify the mutations as a preexisting condition and so refuse to cover treatments related to the "condition." That concern is hardly irrational :
health insurance companies often decline to offer policies, or offer inflated premiums, to individuals who have a significant family history of cancer. 
The National Breast Cancer Coalition was last year rejected several times for health insurance for its Washington, D.C., staff of eight, because the staff includes some breast cancer survivors.
To find coverage, it had to join a larger organization. 

The trend toward secrecy in genetic testing seems to be catching on.
At a meeting last fall of the American Society of Human Genetics, Thomas H. Murray of Case Western Reserve University asked his audience whether they knew of patients who had requested testing for a genetic trait anonymously or under a false name. 
Hands shot up all over the room.
In many clinical studies, patients are now formally warned that test results could lead to insurance complications if they get into the patient's medical record.
Researchers sometimes obtain special legal documents called certificates of confidentiality that prevent the courts from gaining access to data gathered for a study. 

Keep a Secret?

Other patients are simply avoiding taking genetic tests, thus forgoing whatever medical benefit they might bring.
People with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, a rare hereditary condition that can cause brain and kidney tumors, often find it hard to obtain health insurance because of the expensive surgeries they might need.

Although no prophylactic therapy can prevent the tumors, people with VHL disease can extend their lives by undergoing regular magnetic resonance imaging scans followed by surgical removal of tumors.

According to William C. Dickson, research management chair of the VHL Family Alliance, many parents with the syndrome avoid having their children tested for mutations in the recently discovered gene for VHL because they fear that a genetic diagnosis will make their offspring uninsurable.

Parents with polycystic kidney disease, which may be the most common simply inherited, life-threatening condition, also frequently decide for insurance-related reasons not to subject their children to testing, reports Gregory G. Germino, an investigator at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
Approximately 600,000 Americans have the illness - many unknowingly.
A gene causing many cases, PKD1 , was identified in 1994 using technologies developed under the genome project. 
Testing of PKD1 can sometimes improve medical therapy for a child, Germino says.

Such reports have prompted alarm among health officials. ( Collins admits to being "passionate" on the subject.) A working group on the ethical, legal and social implications of the human genome program, together with the National Action Plan on Breast Cancer, a presidential initiative, recently recommended that insurance providers be prohibited from using genetic information, or an individual's request for testing, as a basis for limiting or denying health insurance.

Currently insurers do not usually ask directly for results of genetic tests;
inquiries about the health or cause of death of a person's parents are sufficient to identify many of those at high risk.
But insurers may consider genetic data for an individual policy. "They don't ask now about genetic testing, but that will change," says Nancy S. Wexler, president of the Hereditary Disease Foundation, who has herself a 50 percent risk of Huntington's disease.

Because patients with genetic diseases are often reluctant to identify themselves, gauging the extent of discrimination is difficult.
But new data strengthen earlier anecdotal reports suggesting the phenomenon is widespread.
In one of the first extensive surveys, which was scheduled for publication in January in Engineering and Scientific Ethics , Lisa N. Geller of Harvard Medical School and her co-authors describe how they sent questionnaires to people who, though free of any symptoms, are at risk for acquiring a genetically based illness.
Of the 917 who responded, a total of 455 asserted that they had been discriminated against after they revealed a genetic diagnosis.

Follow-up interviews by the researchers provided details of health and life insurers who refused or canceled coverage, adoption agencies that required prospective parents to "pass" a genetic test (but on one occasion misunderstood the results) and employers who fired or refused to hire on the basis of a treatable genetic condition or the mere possibility of one.
Paul R., Billings of the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Palo Alto, Calif., one of the study's authors, declares that "the public will reject genetic testing out of fear of discrimination." In a separate study by E. Virginia Lapham of Georgetown University and others, 22 percent of a group of 332 people who had a genetic illness in their families reported having been refused health insurance.

Several European countries have taken steps to prevent abuse of genetic data.
Basic medical insurance is not a major concern in Europe, because it is guaranteed by governments. 
Yet France, Belgium and Norway all have laws preventing the use of genetic information by life and medical insurance companies and by most employers.
The Netherlands guarantees basic life insurance, and Germany has some protections.

In the U.S. several states have enacted legislation that limits discrimination based on genetic data.
Employment discrimination is prohibited by federal law, and several bills now before Congress would discourage or prevent gene-based insurance discrimination nationally.
But their prospects are uncertain. 

The potential for psychological harm from DNA testing is receiving growing attention.
Because a test may have implications for all the members of an extended family, powerful feelings of guilt and sadness can disrupt relationships.

Fear of such consequences may explain the unexpectedly low utilization of a test that has been available for some years to identify most carriers of cystic fibrosis -who are not themselves at risk.

Genetic counselors have formed a strong consensus that because of the potential for harm, children should not be tested for mutations predicting diseases that will not develop until adulthood, unless there are possible medical interventions.
That principle rules out testing children for Huntington's, because there is no preventive therapy against developing the rocking motions and mental impairment that characterize the illness. 
Yet parents do seek testing of their children:
in one case, to avoid paying for a college education if the youngster was likely to succumb.

The principal U.S. network of testing laboratories is known as Helix.
According to a survey by Dorothy C. Wertz and Philip R. Reilly of the Shriver Center for Mental Retardation in Waltham, Mass., 23 percent of the network's labs technically capable of checking for the Huntington's mutation have done so in children younger than 12 years.
More than 40 percent of Helix laboratories had performed tests for patients directly, with no physician involved.
Yet the public can easily misunderstand the meaning of genetic diagnoses, Wertz notes. 
Moreover, she says, many physicians are not well enough informed to be giving genetic advice.

On the credit side of the ledger, it is clear that some patients in families afflicted with hereditary colon cancer, and possibly breast cancer, too, have already made wise medical choices as a result of discoveries facilitated by the genome program.
Some with a mutation predisposing them to colon cancer, for example, have had their colons removed as soon as threatening changes started to occur -a procedure that probably saved their lives.
Eagerly awaited novel therapies, though, are further in the future.

Collins notes that only six years after a team that he co-led found the gene associated with cystic fibrosis in 1989, drugs developed to counter effects of the mutated gene were already being tested in patients.
How soon a definitive treatment will emerge, however, is anyone's guess.

The treatment prospect that has most gripped the public imagination is gene therapy -an approach that would be better described as gene transplantation.
But attempts to treat familial hypercholesterolemia, cystic fibrosis and Duchenne's muscular dystrophy have each resulted in failures over the past year, apparently because patients' cells did not take up enough of the transplanted genes.
The earlier treatment of adenosine deaminase deficiency described in this magazine by W. French Anderson [see "Gene Therapy," SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, September 1995] showed at best a modest effect.
Last December an NIH review concluded that "clinical efficacy has not been definitively demonstrated at this time in any gene therapy protocol."

Following the Money

In spite of these problems, the burgeoning genetic revolution is already causing seismic reverberations in the business world. 
Pharmaceutical companies have staked hundreds of millions of dollars on efforts to discover genes connected to disease, because they could show the way to molecules that might then be good targets for drugs or diagnostic reagents.

One favored shortcut strategy, pioneered by J. Craig Venter of the Institute for Genomic Research in Gaithersburg, Md., analyzes intermediate products -messenger RNAs- created when genes are activated in a cell.
The technique produces chemical labels that reveal some basic information about their associated genes for a relatively small investment of effort.

Some scientists were initially unimpressed by Venter's end run around traditional techniques;
his approach does not provide the comprehensive information that full-scale sequencing provides.
Nevertheless, it has proved its worth.
Two companies have embarked on a microscopic gold rush to find lucrative genes using Venter's strategy: Human Genome Sciences (the parent of Venter's organization) and Incyte Pharmaceuticals in Palo Alto, Calif.

Both are now busily patenting sequences.

William A., Haseltine, president of Human Genome Sciences, says his company has identified 90 percent of all human genes and has used dozens of them to make proteins with potentially therapeutic properties.
Human Genome Sciences has also made "a substantial impact," Haseltine declares, on the drug development program of its principal business partner, SmithKline Beecham.

Incyte, for its part, claims to have identified "most" human genes and has found customers for its databases.

The prospect of commercial exploitation of the genome is motivating protests in some quarters.
Most of the political flack is being taken by an initiative known as the Human Genome Diversity Project.
The diversity project -which is not formally linked to the genome project- aims to study the variations in genetic sequences among different peoples of the world.

Supporters of the diversity project, which was conceived by Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza of Stanford University, note that the sequence generated by the genome project proper will be derived mainly from DNA donors of European and North American origin. 
Studying the 0.1 percent variation among people around the world might yield valuable information about adaptation, Cavalli-Sforza reasons.

Henry T., Greely, a Stanford law professor who is a co-organizer of the genome diversity project, recognizes that data about genetic variation could invite racists to concoct arbitrary rationales justifying discrimination.
But he says the project will accept its responsibility to fight such abuses, and he notes that the available data point to how superficial the racial differences are: most of the 0.1 percent of variation in humans occurs among members of the same race, rather than among races.

Still, the project is struggling politically.
One of the thorns in its side is the Rural Advancement Foundation International ( RAFI ), a small campaigning organization based in Ottawa that opposes patents on living things.
Jean Christie of the foundation says her group fights the diversity project because it will produce cell lines that can be patented by gene-bagging companies from rich countries.

Greely insists that the project's protocols eliminate the possibility that samples will be used for profit without the consent of donors.
Notwithstanding that assurance, a committee of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO) has criticized the project's lack of contact with indigenous groups during its planning phase.
Concerns about exploitation have also been fueled by a controversy over a patent granted to the NIH on a cell line derived from a Papua New Guinean man. 
Such worries may explain why the genome diversity project has so far failed to obtain large-scale funding.

How the genome patent race will play out is still unclear. 
Collins says that a scramble to patent every sequenced gene would be "destabilizing," as it would imperil cooperation among investigators.
Traditionally, scholars have been free to carry out research unhampered by patents.
That freedom cannot be taken for granted, states Rebecca Eisenberg, a patent expert at the University of Michigan.
As more scholars forge commercial ties, proprietary interests in the genome may be more vigorously enforced.

Before a gene can be patented, the "inventor" has to know something about its function, in order to meet the legal requirement of utility.
Industry, however, controls most of the research muscle that can efficiently discover useful properties.
So commercialization seems to be an inevitable consequence of the genome's scientific exploration, as it is for other explorations. 
Although the U.S. Patent Office recently held hearings to examine questions raised by gene patenting, turning back the clock to disallow such patents, as some critics urge, seems unlikely. 
And so long as corporate dollars do not stifle collaboration, people in rich countries will probably benefit from the feeding frenzy.

How much the rest of the world will gain, though, is a valid question.
Some gene therapies now being evaluated would be tailored to individual patients.

But James V. Neel, a pioneer in human genetics at the University of Michigan, warned researchers recently that "individual therapies will be too expensive" for widespread use.
Humble interventions such as improved diet and exercise may ameliorate adult-onset diabetes more cost-effectively than genetic medicine, he points out.
Neel urged geneticists to pay attention to the deteriorating environment many humans inhabit as well as to their DNA.

Still, the gene race is on.
Better medicines will be found;
some people will make fortunes, and some will probably suffer harm.
But it is a safe bet that although all humans share DNA, not all of them will share in its bounty. 
The World Health Organization reports that 12.2 million children under the age of five died in the developing world in 1993.
More than 95 percent of those deaths could have been avoided, according to the agency, if those children had access to nutrition and medical care that are already standard practice -in countries that can afford them.
For many of the world's unfortunates, genetic medicine may always be a distant dream.

Chromosome 17

This partial genome map, shown on these and the fowllowing pages, was published last December by researches at tha Whitehead Institut for Biomedical Research and France's Généthon. 
It can be viewed in full at http://www-genome.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/contig/phys_map 
