
Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System 

The brain is the organ that moves the muscles.
That may sound a bit simplistic, but ultimately, movement-or more accurately, behaviour the primary function of the nervous system.
In order to make useful movements, the brain must know what is happening outside, in the environment.
Thus, the body contains cells that are specialized for detecting environmental events and others that are specialized for producing movements.
Of course, complex animals such as ourselves do not react automatically to events in our environment; our brains are flexible enough so that we behave in different ways, according to present circumstances and those we experienced in the past.

Besides perceiving and acting, we can remember and decide.
All these abilities are made possible by the billions of cells found in the nervous system.

This chapter describes the structure and functions of the most important cells of the nervous system.
Information, in the form of light, sound waves, odors, tastes, or contact with objects, is gathered from the environment by specialized cells called sensory neurons .
Movements are accomplished by the contraction of muscles, which are controlled by motor neurons .
(The term motor is used here in its original sense to refer to movement, not to a mechanical engine).
And in between sensory neurons and motor neurons come all the other 100 billion (or so) neurons that do the perceiving, learning, remembering, deciding, and controlling of complex behaviors.

In order to understand how the nervous system controls behaviour, we must first understand its parts-the cells that compose it.
Because this chapter deals with cells, you need not be familiar with the structure of the nervous system, which is presented in Chapter 4.
However, you need to know that the nervous system consists of two basic divisions, the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system.
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the parts that are encased by the bones of the skull and spinal column: the brain and the spinal cord.
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is found outside these bones and consists of the nerves and some of the sensory organs.

CELLS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Neurons 

The neuron (nerve cell) is the information-processing and information-transmitting element of the nervous system.

Before describing the particular characteristics of neurons, I will describe the structures and properties these cells have in common with other cells of the body.

Structures of Cells 

Figure 2.1 illustrates a typical animal cell (See Figure 2.1 ).
The membrane defines the boundary of the cell.
It consists of a double layer of lipid (fatlike) molecules.
Floating in the membrane are a variety of protein molecules that have special functions.
Some detect substances outside the cell (such as hormones) and pass information about the presence of these substances to the interior of the cell.

Others control access to the interior of the cell, permitting some substances to enter but barring others.

Still others act as pumps, actively pushing certain molecules out of the cell or pulling them in.
Because the membrane of the neuron is especially important in the transmission of information, its characteristics will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter.

The nucleus ("nut") of the cell is round or oval and is covered by the nuclear membrane.
The nucleolus and the chromosomes reside here.
The nucleolus manufactures ribosomes , small structures that are involved in protein synthesis.
The chromosomes, which consist of long strands of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), contain the organism's genetic information.
When they are active, portions of the chromosomes ( genes ) cause production of another complex molecule, messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA).
The mRNA leaves the nuclear membrane and attaches to ribosomes, where it causes the production of a particular protein.
(See Figure 2.2 ).

Proteins are important in cell functions.
As well as providing structure, proteins serve as enzymes , which direct the chemical processes of a cell by controlling chemical reactions.

Enzymes are special protein molecules that act as catalysts;that is, they cause a chemical reaction to take place without becoming a part of the final product themselves.
Because cells contain the constituents needed to synthesize an enormous variety of compounds, the ones they actually do produce depend primarily on the particular enzymes that are present.
Furthermore, there are enzymes that break molecules apart as well as put them together; the enzymes present in a particular region of a cell thus determine which molecules remain intact.

For example, xxx .

In this reversible reaction the relative concentrations of enzymes X and Y determine whether the complex substance AB or its constituents, A and B, will predominate.
Enzyme X makes A and B join; enzyme Y splits AB apart.
(Energy may also be required to make the reactions proceed).

Figure 2.1

The principal structures of an animal cell. 

Figure 2.2

An overview of the process of protein synthesis, controlled by the genes.

The bulk of the cell consists of cytoplasm.
Cytoplasm is complex and varies considerably across types of cells, but it can be most easily characterized as a jellylike, semiliquid substance that fills the space outlined by the membrane.
Cytoplasm is not static and inert; it streams and flows.
It contains small specialized structures, just as the body contains specialized organs.

Mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion) are shaped like oval beads and are formed of a double membrane.
The inner membrane is wrinkled, and the wrinkles make up a set of shelves ( cristae ) that fill the inside of the bead.

Mitochondria perform a vital role in the economy of the cell; many of the biochemical steps involved in the extraction of energy from the breakdown of nutrients take place on the cristae.
Most cell biologists believe that many eons ago mitochondria were free-living organisms, which came to "infect" larger cells.
Because the mitochondria could extract energy more efficiently than the larger cells, they became useful to them and eventually became a permanent part of them.
The cell provides mitochondria with nutrients, and the mitochondria provide the cell with a special molecule- adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-that it uses as its immediate source of energy.

Endoplasmic reticulum appears in two forms: rough and smooth.
Both types consist of folded layers of membrane identical with the membrane that encloses the cell.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum contains ribosomes .
The protein produced by the ribosomes attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum is destined to be transported out of the cell.
For example, the hormone insulin (a protein) is manufactured there in certain cells of the pancreas.
Unattached ribosomes are also distributed around the cytoplasm; the unattached variety appears to produce protein for use within the cell.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is concerned with the transport of substances around the cytoplasm and provides channels for the segregation of various molecules involved in different cellular processes .
Some complex molecules (such as those that consist of several protein molecules) are assembled there.

The Golgi apparatus is a special form of endoplasmic reticulum.
It serves primarily as a wrapping or packaging agent.
For example, secretory cells (such as those that release hormones) wrap their product in a membrane produced by the Golgi apparatus.
When the cell secretes its products, the container migrates to the outer membrane of the cell, fuses with it, and bursts, spilling the product into the fluid surrounding the cell.

As we will see, neurons are secretory cells; they communicate with each other by secreting chemicals by this means.
The Golgi apparatus also produces lysosomes , small sacs that contain enzymes that break down substances no longer needed by the cell.

These products are then recycled or excreted from the cell.

Arranged throughout the cell are microfilaments and microtubules.
Microfilaments are made of the same type of long protein fibers that provide the motive force in muscles.
They are found just under the membrane and give cells (especially neurons) their particular shape.
They probably also control the movement of proteins that are embedded in the membrane.
Microtubules are larger than microfilaments and consist of bundles of filaments arranged around a hollow core.
They provide motive force in cells such as sperms and transport substances from place to place in other types of cells, including neurons.

Structures of Neurons 

Neurons come in many shapes and varieties, according to the specialized jobs they perform.
They usually have, in one form or another, the following four structures or regions: (1) cell body, or soma; (2) dendrites; (3) axon; and (4) terminal buttons.

Soma .
The soma (cell body) contains the nucleus and much of the machinery that provides for the life processes of the cell.
(See Figure 2.3 ).
Its shape varies considerably in different kinds of neurons.

Dendrites .
Dendron is the Greek word for tree, and the dendrites of the neuron look very much like trees.
(See Figure 2.3 ).

Dendrites vary in shape even more widely than do real trees; a glance at Figure 2.4 shows some of the many forms they can take.
(See Figure 2.4 ).

Neurons "converse" with one another, and dendrites serve as important recipients of these messages.
The messages that pass from neuron to neuron are transmitted across the synapse , a junction between the terminal buttons (described below) of the sending cell and a portion of the somatic or dendritic membrane of the receiving cell.
The word synapse derives from the Greek synaptein , "to join together".

Synapses on the dendrites of many neurons occur not on the branches or twigs but on little buds known as dendritic spines .
Figure 2.5 illustrates a terminal button of the sending cell and a dendritic spine of the receiving cell.
The terminal button is partly cut open so that you can see what is inside.
(See Figure 2.5 ).
Synapses occur not only between a terminal button and the dendrite of another neuron but also between a terminal button and the soma of another neuron.
In most cases there are no spines on the membrane of the soma; the terminal button just meets the smooth surface of the membrane.
(See Figure 2.6 ).
Communication at a synapse proceeds in only one direction: from the terminal button to the membrane of the other cell.

Axon .
The dendritic and somatic membranes receive messages from other cells-in some cases from hundreds of other cells.
These messages affect the activity of the neuron, which as a result may or may not transmit messages down its axon to other cells-those cells to which this neuron transmits messages.
(See Figure 2.7 ).

Figure 2.3

The principal structures or regions of a multipolar neuron.

Figure 2.4

A sample of the variety of dendritic shapes of various types of neurons.

The axon is a long, slender tube.
It carries information away from the cell body to the terminal buttons.
The message is electrical, but as we will see, it is not carried down the axon the way a message travels down a telephone wire.
Like dendrites, axons and their branches come in different shapes.
In fact, the three principal types of neurons are classified according to the way in which their axons and dendrites leave the soma.

The neuron depicted in Figures 2.3 and 2.7 is the most common type found in the central nervous system; it is a multipolar neuron .
In this type of neuron the somatic membrane gives rise to one axon but to the trunks of many dendritic trees.
Bipolar neurons give rise to one axon and one dendritic tree, at opposite ends of the soma.
(See Figure 2.8a ).
These neurons are usually sensory; that is, they convey information from the environment to the central nervous system.

The third type of nerve cell is the unipolar neuron .
It has only one stalk that leaves the soma and divides into two branches a short distance away.
(See Figure 2.8b ).

Unipolar neurons, like bipolar neurons, transmit information from the environment to the CNS.
The arborizations farther from the CNS are dendrites; the arborizations within the CNS end in terminal buttons.

The dendrites of most unipolar neurons detect sensory information applied to the skin.

Terminal Buttons .
Most axons divide and branch many times.
At the ends of the twigs are found little knobs called terminal buttons , which have a very special function: When a message is passed down the axon, the terminal buttons of the transmitting cell secrete a chemical called a transmitter substance .
This chemical (there are many different ones in the CNS) affects the receiving cell.
The effect it produces excites or inhibits the receiving cell and thus helps determine whether this cell will send a message down its axon to the cells with which it communicates.
Details of this process will be described later in this chapter and in Chapter 3.

Figure 2.5

A synapse of a terminal button of one neuron with a dendritic spine of another. 

Figure 2.6

A synapse of a terminal button of one neuron with the somatic membrane of another. 

Figure 2.7

An overview of the synaptic connections between neurons.

Figure 2.8

Neurons (a) A bipolar neuron, primarily found in sensory systems (for example, vision and audition); (b) A unipolar neuron, found in the somatosensory system (touch, pain, and the like).

Supporting Cells 

Neurons constitute only about half the volume of the CNS.

The rest consists of a variety of supporting cells.

Because neurons have a very high rate of metabolism but have no means of storing nutrients, they must constantly be supplied with nutrients and oxygen or they will quickly die.
Unlike most other cells of the body, neurons cannot be replaced when they die; we are born with as many as we will ever have.
Thus, the role played by the cells that support and protect neurons is very important to our existence.

Glia 

The most important supporting cells of the central nervous system are the neuroglia , or "nerve glue".
Glia (also called glial cells ) do indeed glue the CNS together, but they do much more than that.
Neurons lead a very sheltered existence; they are physically and chemically buffered from the rest of the body by the glial cells.
Glial cells surround neurons and hold them in place, controlling their supply of some of the chemicals they need to exchange messages with other neurons; they insulate neurons from one another so that neural messages do not get scrambled; and they even act as housekeepers, destroying and removing the carcasses of neurons that are killed by injury or that die as a result of old age.

There are several types of glial cells, each of which plays a special role in the CNS. 
Astrocyte means "star cell," and this name accurately describes the shape of these cells.
Astrocytes (or astroglia ) are rather large, as glia go, and provide physical support to neurons.

Together with microglia, they also clean up debris within the brain.
Finally, they chemically buffer the fluid surrounding neurons, a function that will be discussed later in this chapter.

Some of the astrocyte's processes (the arms of the star) are wrapped around blood vessels; other processes are wrapped around parts of neurons, so that the somatic and dendritic membrane of neurons is largely surrounded by astrocytes.
(See Figure 2.9 ).

This arrangement suggested to the Italian histologist Camillo Golgi (1844- 1926) that astrocytes supply neurons with nutrients from the capillaries and dispose of their waste products (Golgi, 1903).
He thought that nutrients passed from capillaries to the cytoplasm of the astrocytes and then through the cytoplasm to the neurons, with waste products following the opposite route.
As Figure 2.9 shows, this hypothesis is plausible.

However, this hypothesis has not been confirmed.

There is good evidence from the peripheral nervous system, though, that the satellite cells do transport substances to neurons.
Lasek, Gainer, and Przybylski (1974) found that in the peripheral nervous system of the squid, neurons take up proteins that are synthesized in adjacent satellite cells.
Also, some neurons lose their ability to produce the transmitter substance if the surrounding satellite cells are destroyed (Patterson and Chun, 1974).

Besides having a possible role in transporting chemicals to neurons, astrocytes serve as the matrix that holds neurons in place.
They also surround and isolate synapses, apparently minimizing the dispersion of transmitter substances that are released by the terminal buttons.
Thus, astrocytes provide each synapse with an isolation booth, keeping the neurons' conversations private.

Neurons occasionally die for unknown reasons or are killed by head injury, infection, or stroke.
Certain kinds of astrocytes (along with the microglia) then take up the task of cleaning away the debris .
These cells are able to travel around the CNS; they extend and retract their processes ( pseudopodia , or "false feet") and glide about the way amoebas do.
When they contact a piece of debris from a dead neuron, they push themselves against it, finally engulfing and digesting it.
We call this process phagocytosis ( phagein , "to eat"; kutos , "cell").
If there is a considerable amount of injured tissue to be cleaned up, astrocytes will divide and produce enough new cells to do the task.

Figure 2.9

Structure and location of astrocytes, whose processes surround capillaries and neurons of the central nervous system.

Once the dead tissue is broken down, a framework of astrocytes will be left to fill in the vacant area, and a specialized kind of astrocyte will form scar tissue, walling off the area.

Microglia are smaller than the other types of glia.
They serve as phagocytes, along with the astrocytes.

Oligodendroglia are residents of the CNS, and their principal function is to provide support to axons and to produce the myelin sheath , which insulates most axons from one another.
(Some axons are not myelinated and lack this sheath).
Myelin, 80 percent lipid and 20 percent protein, is produced by the oligodendroglia in the form of a tube surrounding the axon.
This tube does not form a continuous sheath; rather, it consists of a series of segments, each approximately 1 mm long, with a small (1-2 xxx ) portion of uncoated axon between the segments.
This bare portion of axon is called a node of Ranvier , after its discoverer.
The myelinated axon, then, resembles a string of elongated beads.
(Actually, the beads are very much elongated, their length being approximately 80 times their width).

A given oligodendroglial cell produces several segments of myelin.
During the development of the CNS, oligodendroglia form processes shaped something like canoe paddles.
Each of these paddle-shaped processes then wraps many times around a segment of an axon and, while doing so, produces layers of myelin.
Each paddle, then, becomes a segment of an axon's myelin sheath.
(See Figure 2.10 ).

Unmyelinated axons of the CNS are not actually naked; they are also covered by oligodendroglia.
However, in this case the glial cells do not manufacture myelin; they simply wrap a process loosely around the axon and hold it in place.

Schwann Cells 

In the CNS the oligodendroglia support axons and produce myelin.
In the PNS the Schwann cells perform the same functions.
Most axons in the PNS are myelinated.
The myelin sheath occurs in segments, as it does in the CNS; each segment consists of a single Schwann cell, wrapped many times around the axon.
In the CNS the oligodendroglia grow a number of paddle-shaped processes that wrap around a number of axons.
In the PNS a Schwann cell provides myelin for only one axon, and the entire Schwann cell-not merely a part of it-surrounds the axon.
(See Figure 2.11 ).

Schwann cells also differ from their CNS counterparts, the oligodendroglia, in an important way.
If damage occurs to a peripheral nerve (which consists of a bundle of many myelinated axons, all covered in a sheath of tough, elastic connective tissue), the Schwann cells aid in the digestion of the dead and dying axons.
Then the Schwann cells arrange themselves in a series of cylinders that act as guides for regrowth of the axons.

The distal portions of the severed axons die, but the stump of each severed axon grows sprouts, which then spread in all directions.
If one of these sprouts encounters a cylinder provided by a Schwann cell, the sprout will quickly grow through the tube (at a rate of up to 3 -4 mm a day), while the other, nonproductive sprouts wither away.
If the cut ends of the nerve are still located close enough to each other, the axons will reestablish connections with the muscles and sense organs they previously served.

Figure 2.10

Oligodendroglial cell, which forms the myelin that surrounds many axons in the central nervous system.

Each glial cell forms one segment of myelin for several adjacent axons.

Figure 2.11

Schwann cells.

During development, Schwann cells tightly wrap themselves many times around an individual axon in the peripheral nervous system and form one segment of the myelin sheath.

On the other hand, if a section of the nerve is damaged beyond repair, the axons will not be able to find their way to the original sites of innervation.
In such cases neurosurgeons can sew the cut ends of the nerve together, if not too much of the nerve has been damaged. 
(Nerves are flexible and can be stretched a bit).

If too long a section has been lost, and if the nerve was an important one (controlling hand muscles, for example), a piece of nerve of about the same size can be taken from another part of the body.
Because many nerves overlap in the area of tissue they innervate, neurosurgeons have no trouble finding a branch of a nerve that the patient can lose without ill effect.
The surgeon, using a special microscope and very delicate instruments, grafts this piece of nerve to the damaged one.
Of course, the axons in the excised and transplanted piece of nerve die away, but the tubes produced by the Schwann cells guide the sprouts of the damaged nerve and help them find their way back to the hand muscles.

Unfortunately, the glial cells of the CNS are not so cooperative as the supporting cells of the PNS.
If axons in the brain or spinal cord are damaged, new sprouts will form, as in the PNS.
However, the budding axons encounter scar tissue produced by the astrocytes, and they cannot penetrate this barrier.
Even if they could get through, the axons would not reestablish their original connections without guidance similar to that provided by the Schwann cells of the PNS .
During development, axons have two modes of growth .
The first mode causes them to elongate so that they reach their target, which could be as far away as the other end of the brain or spinal cord.
Schwann cells provide this signal to injured axons.
The second mode causes axons to stop elongating and begin sprouting terminal buttons, because they have reached their target.
Liuzzi and Lasek (1987) found that even when astrocytes do not produce scar tissue, they appear to produce a chemical signal that instructs regenerating axons to begin the second mode of growth: to stop elongating and start sprouting terminal buttons.
Thus, the difference in the regenerative properties of the CNS and PNS results from differences in the characteristics of the supporting cells, not from differences in the neurons.

THE BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER 

Long ago, physiologists discovered that if a dye such as trypan blue was injected into an animal's bloodstream, all tissues except the brain and spinal cord would be tinted blue.
However, if the same dye is injected into the ventricles of the brain, the blue color will spread throughout the CNS (Bradbury, 1979).
This experiment demonstrates that a barrier exists between the blood and the fluid that surrounds the cells of the brain-the blood-brain barrier .

Some substances can cross the blood-brain barrier; others cannot.
Thus, it is selectively permeable ( per , "through; meare , "to pass").
In most of the body the cells that line the capillaries do not fit together absolutely tightly .
Small gaps are found between them that permit the free exchange of most substances between the blood plasma and the fluid outside the blood vessels that surrounds the cells.
In the central nervous system the capillaries lack these gaps, and thus, many substances cannot leave the blood.
Substances that can dissolve in lipids pass through the capillaries easily, because they simply dissolve through the membranes of the cells that line the capillaries.
Other substances, such as glucose (the primary fuel of the central nervous system) must be actively transported through the capillary walls, carried by special proteins (Crone, 1965).

The messages that are conveyed from place to place in the nervous system involve movements of substances through the membranes of neurons.
If the composition of the fluid that bathes neurons is changed even slightly, the transmission of these messages will be disrupted.
Thus, if this fluid is not closely regulated, the brain cannot function normally.
The presence of the blood-brain barrier probably makes it easier to regulate the composition of this fluid.

The blood-brain barrier is not uniform throughout the nervous system.
In several places the barrier is relatively permeable, allowing substances excluded elsewhere to cross freely.
For example, the area postrema is a part of the brain that controls vomiting.
The blood-brain barrier is much weaker there, permitting this region to be more sensitive to toxic substances in the blood.
A poison that enters the circulatory system from the stomach can thus stimulate this area to initiate vomiting.
If the organism is lucky, the poison can be expelled from the stomach before it causes too much damage.

Structure of the Nervous System 

The goal of neuroscience research is to understand how the brain works.
In order to understand the results of this research, you must be acquainted with the basic structure of the nervous system.
The number of terms introduced in this chapter is kept to a minimum (but as you will see, the minimum is still a rather large number).
With the framework you will receive from this chapter, you should have no trouble learning the material presented in subsequent chapters.

BASIC FEATURES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Figure 4.1

Side and frontal views of an alligator and a human, showing the terms used to denote anatomical directions.

Before beginning a description of the nervous system, I want to discuss the terms used to describe it.
The gross anatomy of the brain was described long ago, and everything that could be seen without the aid of a microscope was given a name.
Early anatomists named most brain structures according to their similarity to commonplace objects: amygdala, or "almond-shaped object"; hippocampus, or "sea horse"; genu, or "knee"; cortex, or "bark"; pons, or "bridge"; uncus, or "hook," to give a few examples.
Throughout this book I will translate the names of anatomical terms as I introduce them, because the translation makes the terms more memorable.
For example, knowing that cortex means "bark" (like the bark of a tree) will help you remember that the cortex is the outer layer of the brain.

When describing topographical features (hills, roads, rivers, etc.), we need to use terms denoting directions (for example, the road goes north and then turns to the east as it climbs the hill).
Similarly, in describing structures of the nervous system and their interconnecting pathways, we must have available a set of words that define geographical relations.

Directions in the nervous system are normally described relative to the neuraxis , an imaginary line drawn through the spinal cord up to the front of the brain.
For simplicity's sake, let us consider an animal with a straight neuraxis.
Figure 4.1 shows an alligator and a human.
This alligator is certainly laid out in a linear fashion; we can draw a straight line that starts between its eyes and continues down the center of its spinal cord.
(See Figure 4.1 ).
The front end is anterior , and the tail is posterior .
The terms rostral (toward the beak) and caudal (toward the tail) are also employed; I will more often use these latter terms.
The top of the head and the back are part of the dorsal surface; the ventral (front) surface faces the ground.
These directions are somewhat more complicated in the human; because we stand upright, our neuraxis bends.
When we describe structures in the human brain, the terms superior and inferior are often used.
The superior structure is above (dorsal to) the inferior one.
The frontal views of the alligator and the human illustrate the terms lateral and medial , toward the side and toward the midline, respectively.
(See Figure 4.1 ).

Two other useful terms are ipsilateral and contralateral . 
Ipsilateral refers to structures on the same side of the body.
Thus, if we say that the olfactory bulb sends axons to the ipsilateral hemisphere, we mean that the left olfactory bulb sends axons to the left hemisphere and the right olfactory bulb sends axons to the right hemisphere. 
Contralateral refers to structures on opposite sides of the body.
If we say that a particular region of the left cerebral cortex controls movements of the contralateral hand, we mean that the region controls movements of the right hand.

To see what is in the nervous system, we have to cut it open; to be able to convey information about what we find, we slice it in a standard way.
Figure 4.2 shows a human nervous system.
1 Transversely, like a salami, giving us cross sections (also known as frontal sections)
2 Parallel to the ground, giving us horizontal sections 
3 Perpendicular to the ground and parallel to the neuraxis, giving us sagittal sections 


Note that because of our upright posture, cross sections of the spinal cord are actually parallel to the ground.
(See Figure 4.2 ).

Figure 4.2

Planes of section as they pertain to the human central nervous system. 

An Overview 

Figure 4.3 illustrates the relation of the brain and spinal cord to the head and neck of a human.
Do not be concerned with unfamiliar labels on this figure; these structures will be described later. 
(See Figure 4.3 ).
The brain is a large mass of neurons, glia, and other supporting cells.
It is the most protected organ of the body, encased in a tough, bony skull and floating in a pool of cerebrospinal fluid.
The brain receives a copious supply of blood and is chemically guarded by the blood brain barrier.

Blood Supply 

The brain receives approximately 20 percent of the blood flow from the heart, and it receives it continuously.
Other parts of the body, such as the skeletal muscles or digestive system, receive varying quantities of blood depending on their needs, relative to those of other regions.
But the brain always receives its share.
The brain cannot store its fuel (primarily glucose), nor can it temporarily extract energy without oxygen as the muscles can; therefore, a consistent blood supply is essential.
A 1-second interruption of the blood flow to the brain uses up much of the dissolved oxygen; a 6-second interruption produces unconsciousness.
Permanent damage occurs within a few minutes.

Figure 4.3

The relation of the brain and spinal cord to the head and neck.

Circulation of blood in the body proceeds from arteries to arterioles to capillaries; the capillaries then drain into venules, which collect and become veins.
The veins travel back to the heart, where the process begins again.

Figure 4.4 shows a bottom view of the brain and its major arterial supply.
(The spinal cord has been cut off, as have the left half of the cerebellum and the left temporal lobe).
Two major sets of arteries serve the brain: the vertebral arteries , which serve the caudal portion of the brain, and the internal carotid arteries , which serve the rostral portion.
(See Figure 4.4 ).

You can see that the blood supply is rather peculiar; major arteries join together and then separate again.

Normally, there is a little mixing of blood from the rostral and caudal arterial supplies and, in the case of the rostral supply, from that of the right and left sides of the brain.
But if a blood vessel becomes blocked (for example, by a blood clot), blood flow can follow alternative routes, reducing the probability of loss of blood supply and subsequent destruction of brain tissue.

Venous drainage of the brain is shown in Figure 4.5.

Major veins, like major arteries, are interconnected, so that blood in some veins can flow in either direction (shown by double-ended arrows), depending on intracerebral pressures in various parts of the brain. 
(See Figure 4.5 ).

Meninges 

Figure 4.5

Venous drainage of the brain. 

The entire nervous system-brain, spinal cord, cranial and spinal nerves, and autonomic ganglia-is covered by tough connective tissue.
The protective sheaths around the brain and spinal cord are referred to as the meninges (singular: meninx ).
The meninges consist of three layers, which are shown in Figure 4.6.
The outer layer is thick, tough, and flexible but unstretchable; its name, dura mater , means "hard mother".
The middle layer of the meninges, the arachnoid membrane , gets its name from the weblike appearance of the arachnoid trabeculae that protrude from it (from the Greek arachne , meaning "spider"; trabecula means "track").
The arachnoid membrane is soft and spongy and lies beneath the dura mater.
Closely attached to the brain and spinal cord, and following every surface convolution, is the pia mater ("pious mother").
The smaller surface blood vessels of the brain and spinal cord are contained within this layer.
Between the pia mater and arachnoid membrane is a gap called the subarachnoid space .
This space is filled with a liquid called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
(See Figure 4.6 ).

The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is covered with two layers of meninges.
The middle layer (arachnoid membrane), with its associated pool of CSF, covers only the brain and spinal cord .
Outside the central nervous system (CNS), the outer and inner layers (dura mater and pia mater) fuse and form a sheath that covers the spinal and cranial nerves and the autonomic ganglia.

In the first edition of this book I said that I did not know why the outer and inner layers of the meninges were referred to as "mothers".
I received a letter from medical historians at the Department of Anatomy at UCLA that explained the name.
(Sometimes, it pays to proclaim one's ignorance).
A tenth-century Persian physician, Ali ibn Abbas, used the Arabic term al umm to refer to the meninges .
The term literally means "mother" but was used to designate any swaddling material, because Arabic lacked a specific term for the word membrane.
The tough outer membrane was called al umm al djafiya , and the soft inner one was called al umm al rigiga .
When the writings of Ali ibn Abbas were translated into Latin during the eleventh century, the translator, who was probably not familiar with the structure of the meninges, made a literal translation of al umm .
He referred to the membranes as the "hard mother" and the "pious mother" (pious in the sense of "delicate"), rather than using a more appropriate Latin word.

The Ventricular System and Production of CSF 

The brain is very soft and jellylike.
The considerable weight of a human brain (approximately 1400 g), along with its delicate construction, necessitates that it be protected from shock.
A human brain cannot even support its own weight well; it is difficult to remove and handle a fresh brain from a recently deceased human without damaging it.

Fortunately, the intact brain within a living human is well-protected.
It floats in a bath of CSF contained within the subarachnoid space.
Because the brain is completely immersed in liquid, its net weight is reduced to approximately 80 g; thus, pressure on the base of the brain is considerably diminished.
The CSF surrounding the brain and spinal cord also reduces the shock to the central nervous system that would be caused by sudden head movement.

The brain contains a series of hollow, interconnected chambers called ventricles , which are filled with CSF. 
(See Figure 4.7 ).
The largest chambers are the lateral ventricles , which are connected to the third ventricle .
The third ventricle is located at the midline of the brain; its walls divide the surrounding part of the brain into symmetrical halves.
A bridge of neural tissue called the massa intermedia crosses through the middle of the third ventricle and serves as a convenient reference point.
The cerebral aqueduct , a long tube, connects the third ventricle to the fourth ventricle .
The lateral ventricles constitute the first and second ventricles, but they are never referred to as such. 
(See Figure 4.7 ).

Cerebrospinal fluid is manufactured by a special vascular structure called the choroid plexus , which protrudes into each of the ventricles and produces CSF from blood plasma.
The CSF is produced continuously; the total volume of CSF is approximately 125 ml, and the half-life (the time it takes for half of the CSF present in the ventricular system to be replaced by fresh fluid) is about 3 hours.
Therefore, several times this amount is produced by the choroid plexus each day.
The continuous production of CSF means that there must be a mechanism for its removal; Figure 4.8 illustrates the production, circulation, and reabsorption of CSF.

Figure 4.6

The meninges: dura mater, arachnoid membrane, and pia mater. 

Figure 4.7

The ventricular system of the brain. 

Figure 4.8 shows a slightly rotated midsagittal view of the central nervous system, which shows only one of the lateral ventricles.
(See Figure 4.8 ).
CSF is produced by the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles, and it flows into the third ventricle.
More CSF is produced in this ventricle, which then flows through the cerebral aqueduct to the fourth ventricle, where still more CSF is produced.
The CSF leaves the fourth ventricle through small openings that connect with the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain.
The CSF then flows through the subarachnoid space around the central nervous system, where it is reabsorbed into the blood supply through the arachnoid granulations .
These pouch-shaped structures protrude into the superior sagittal sinus , a blood vessel that drains into the veins serving the brain.
(See insert, Figure 4.8 ).

The meninges, skull, and vertebral column encase the CNS in a rigid container of fixed volume.
This situation means that any growth in the mass of the brain must result in displacement of the fluid contents of the container.
Hence growth of a brain tumor, depending on its location, will often deform the walls of the ventricular system, as the invading mass takes up volume previously occupied by CSF.
(It is fortunate that these hollow ventricles exist; the only other fluid-filled spaces a re the blood vessels, which would be constricted by a growing tumor if there were no ventricles in the brain).

Occasionally, the flow of CSF is interrupted at some point in its route of passage.
For example, the cerebral aqueduct may be blocked by a tumor.
This occlusion results in greatly increased pressure within the ventricles, because the choroid plexus continues to produce CSF.
The walls of the ventricles then expand and produce a condition known as hydrocephalus (literally, "waterhead").

If the obstruction remains, and if nothing is done to reverse the increased intracerebral pressure, blood vessels will be occluded, and permanent-perhaps fatal-brain damage will occur.
Fortunately, a surgeon can usually operate on the person, drilling a hole through the skull and inserting a plastic tube into one of the ventricles.
The tube is then placed beneath the skin and connected to a pressure relief valve that is implanted in the abdominal cavity.
When the pressure in the ventricles becomes excessive, the valve permits the CSF to escape into the abdomen, where it is eventually reabsorbed into the blood supply.
Figure 4.9 shows a drawing of a brain of an infant with a drainage tube inserted into the right lateral ventricle. 
(See Figure 4.9 ).

INTERIM SUMMARY 

Anatomists have adopted a set of terms to describe the locations of parts of the body.
Anterior is toward the head, posterior is toward the tail, lateral is toward the side, medial is toward the middle, dorsal is toward the back, and ventral is toward the front surface of the body.
In the special case of the nervous system, rostral means toward the beak (or nose) and caudal means toward the tail.
Ipsilateral means "same side" and contralateral means "other side".
A cross section (or frontal section) slices the nervous system like a salami, a horizontal section slices it parallel to the ground, and a sagittal section slices it perpendicular to the ground, parallel to the neuraxis.

Figure 4.8

Production, circulation, and reabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid.

Figure 4.9

Insertion of a shunt tube to relieve a congenital case of hydrocephalus; the infant was born with an abnormally small cerebral aqueduct.

The tube will permit the dammed-up cerebrospinal fluid to escape.

The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system consists of the spinal and cranial nerves and peripheral ganglia.

The CNS is covered with the meninges: dura mater, arachnoid membrane, and pia mater.
The space under the arachnoid membrane is filled with cerebrospinal fluid, in which the brain floats.
The PNS is covered with only the dura mater and pia mater.
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced in the choroid plexus of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles.
It flows from the two lateral ventricles into the third ventricle, through the cerebral aqueduct into the fourth ventricle, then into the subarachnoid space, and finally back into the blood supply.
If the flow of CSF is blocked by a tumor or other obstruction, the result is hydrocephalus: enlargement of the ventricles and subsequent brain damage.

THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Although the brain is exceedingly complicated, an understanding of the basic features of brain development makes it easier to learn and remember the location of the most important structures.
With that end in mind, I introduce these features here in the context of brain development.

The central nervous system begins its existence early in embryonic life as a hollow tube, and it maintains this basic shape even after it is fully developed.
Early in development the central nervous system contains three interconnected chambers.
These chambers become ventricles, and the tissue that surrounds them becomes the three major parts of the brain: the forebrain , the midbrain , and the hindbrain . 
(See Figure 4.10a ).
Later, the rostral chamber divides into three separate chambers, which become the two lateral ventricles and the third ventricle.
The region around the lateral ventricles becomes the telencephalon ("end brain"), and the region around the third ventricle becomes the diencephalon ("interbrain").
(See Figure 4.10b).
In its final form the chamber inside the mesencephalon ("midbrain") becomes narrow, forming the cerebral aqueduct, and two structures develop in the hindbrain: the metencephalon ("behindbrain") and the myelencephalon ("marrowbrain"). 
(See Figure 4.10c ).

Figure 4.10

An outline of brain development, showing its relation to the ventricles: (a) Early development, (b) Mid development, (c) Late development near time of birth (Adapted from Gardner, E. Fundamentals of Neurology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1975)

Figure 4.11 shows a lateral view of the developing human brain, indicating how the forebrain curls back as it develops, so that it eventually constitutes the largest component of the brain.
(See Figure 4.11 ).
Finally, Table 4.1 summarizes the terms I have introduced here and mentions some of the major structures found in each part of the brain, which will be described in the remainder of the chapter.
(See Table 4.1 ).

Figure 4.11

An outline of human brain development (Adapted from Gardner, E Fundamentals of Neurology, 6th ed Philadelphia: Saunders, 1975)

Figure 4.12

BACK A photograph of a slice of a human brain cut in the horizontal plane, showing fissures and gyri and the layer of cerebral cortex that follows these convolutions. 

Photograph from Structure of the Human Brain: A Photographic Atlas, Second Edition, by Stephen J. DeArmond, Madelaine M. Fusco, and Maynard M. Dewey.

Copyright (C) 1976 by Oxford University Press, Inc.

Reprinted by permission.

Vision 

As we saw in Chapter 4, the brain performs two major functions: It controls the movements of the muscles, producing useful behaviors, and it regulates the body's internal environment.
In order to perform both these tasks, the brain must be informed about what is happening both in the external environment and within the body.

Such information is received by the sensory systems.

This chapter and the next are devoted to a discussion of the ways in which sensory organs detect changes in the environment and the ways in which the brain interprets neural signals from these organs.

People often say that we have five senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch.
Actually, we have more than five, but even experts disagree about how the lines between the various categories should be drawn.

Certainly we should add the vestibular senses; as well as providing us with auditory information, the inner ear supplies information about head orientation and movement.
The sense of touch (or, more accurately, somatosensation ) detects changes in pressure, warmth, cold, vibration, limb position, and events that damage tissue (that is, produce pain).

Everyone agrees that we can detect these stimuli; the issue is whether or not they are detected by separate senses.

This chapter considers vision, the sensory modality that receives the most attention from psychologists, anatomists, and physiologists.
One reason for this attention derives from the fascinating complexity of the sensory organs of vision and the relatively large proportion of the brain that is devoted to the analysis of visual information.
Another reason, I am sure, is that vision is so important to us as individuals.
A natural fascination with such a rich source of information about the world leads to curiosity about how this sensory modality works.
Chapter 7 deals with the other sensory modalities: audition, the somatosenses, the vestibular senses, gustation, and olfaction.

TRANSDUCTION AND SENSORY CODING 

Before studying the particulars of vision, you should understand some general properties of sensory systems.
This section considers the means by which neurons detect environmental changes and the ways in which these changes are encoded in the nervous system.

We receive information about the environment from sensory receptors, specialized neurons that detect a variety of physical events.
Stimuli impinge on the receptors and, through various processes, alter their membrane potentials.
This process is known as sensory transduction because sensory events are transduced ("transferred") into changes in the cells' membrane potential.
These electrical changes are called receptor potentials .
Most receptors lack axons; a portion of their somatic membrane forms synapses with the dendrites of other neurons.
Receptor potentials affect the release of transmitter substances and hence modify the pattern of firing in neurons with which these cells form synapses.

Ultimately, the information reaches the brain. 
(See Figure 6.1 top ).
The exception to this scheme is provided by the receptors for the somatosenses (including the muscle and joint senses), which are sensitive to pressure, stretch, temperature, vibration, and stimuli that damage tissue.

These receptors consist of unipolar neurons with specialized dendrites whose membrane potentials are depolarized by the stimuli they detect.
The depolarizations increase the rate of firing of the cells' axons.
The axons convey sensory information to the central nervous system.
(See Figure 6.1, bottom ).

Each sensory modality (or submodality) possesses different types of receptors which detect the presence of particular chemicals or different forms of energy; examples of the types of stimuli that are detected are presented in Table 6.1 .

The transduction of sensory information into receptor potentials, and then into changes in neural firing, entails a form of code.
The concept of sensory coding deserves some discussion.
A code consists of a set of rules whereby information may be transformed from one set of symbols into another.
For example, a verbal message can be encoded in the pattern of electrical charges in the memory of a digital computer.
In the nervous system sensory information is coded by two basic means: spatial coding and temporal coding.
Spatial coding is used by all sensory modalities, with the possible exception of olfaction.
The principle is quite simple: Different stimuli alter the activity of different neurons.
For example, different receptors detect pressure applied to different parts of the body; thus, different sets of axons entering the spinal cord become active when a particular part of the skin is touched.
The anatomical specificity is maintained up to the somatosensory cortex; neurons there receive information from receptors located in different parts of the skin.
Similarly, photoreceptors in different parts of the retina are stimulated by light reflected from different parts of the scene and send information to neurons in different parts of the brain.

Figure 6.1

Bipolar (top) and unipolar (bottom) sensory neurons.

Bipolar sensory neurons receive sensory information from receptors that lack axons; the dendrites of unipolar sensory neurons are themselves sensitive to physical stimuli.

But we can perceive more than the presence of a stimulus and its location.
As we saw in Chapter 2, intensity of stimulation is encoded by the rate of neural firing; the more intense the stimulus is, the faster the axon fires.

This method of specifying information is called temporal coding .
Possibly, the nervous system uses more complex temporal codes than simple rate; for example, it might use temporal patterns such as those used in Morse code.
However, no experimental evidence indicates that such coding schemes exist.

Table 6.1

The types of transduction accomplished by the sense organs 

A problem we encounter when we consider sensory coding is the identification of the ultimate destination of the information.
Where does the message go?
We must be careful not to seek a decoder that looks at the neural representation of sensory information and interprets the pattern.
If we do so, we commit the error of looking for a homunculus , a "little person" who resides in our heads, looking at and interpreting the activity of cortical neurons, the way a person might look at a display panel of some piece of complex machinery.

The problem with the homunculus approach is that we must go on to explain how the homunculus works, which reintroduces the original problem.
The best strategy is to keep in mind that the function of perception is the control of behavior.
Some stimuli cause immediate responses; others cause neural changes (that is, produce memories) that may affect the organism's behavior at a later date.
Whether immediate or delayed (or both), the pattern of neural activity produced by a particular stimulus causes a change in the patterns of activity of the motor systems controlling behavior.
Finding out how all that works provides enough of a challenge without inserting a homunculus between perception and action.

With this introduction to the general characteristics of sensory processing accomplished, we will now turn to a specific channel-vision.

Figure 6.2

The electromagnetic spectrum. 

THE STIMULUS 

As we all know, our eyes detect the presence of light.

For humans, light is a narrow band of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of between 380 and 760 nm (a nanometer, nm, is one billionth of a meter) is visible to us.
(See Figure 6.2 ).
Other animals can detect different ranges of electromagnetic radiation.
For example, a rattlesnake can detect its prey by means of infrared radiation; thus, it can lode warm-blooded animals in the dark.
The range of wavelengths we call light is not qualitatively different from the rest of the electromagnetic spectrum; it is simply the part of the continuum that we humans can see.

Physicists have discovered that light has two properties.

It acts as a continuous wave, with a particular frequency (and wavelength); and it also acts as if it were composed of small packages of energy, called photons .
When physicists study optics, they find it best to think of light as a wave of radiant energy.
When physicists study the interaction between light and molecules (that is, the study of the chemical basis of vision), they find it best to think of light as a stream of photons.
Physicists have learned to live with this paradox, so I suppose the rest of us should, too.

First, let us consider light as a continuous wave of radiant energy.
Light travels at a constant speed of approximately 300,000 km (186,000 miles) per second.

Thus, if the frequency of oscillation of the wave varies, the distance between the peaks of the waves will similarly vary, but in inverse fashion.
Slower oscillations lead to longer wavelengths, and faster ones to shorter wavelengths.
Wavelength determines one of the perceptual dimensions of light: its hue .
The visible spectrum displays the range of hues that our eyes can detect.

Light can also vary in intensity.
If the intensity of the electromagnetic signal is increased, the stimulus appears to increase in brightness , the second of the perceptual dimensions of light.
The third dimension, saturation , refers to the relative purity of the light that is being perceived.
If all the radiation is of one wavelength, the perceived color is pure, or fully saturated.
Conversely, if the radiation contains all wavelengths, it produces no sensation of hue-it appears white.
Colors with intermediate amounts of saturation consist of different mixtures.
Figure 6 .3 shows some color samples, all with the same hue but with different levels of brightness and saturation.
(See Figure 6.3 ).

When investigators study the transduction of visual stimuli, they refer to photons, or discrete particles of energy, that are absorbed by the photopigment in the rods and cones in the retina.
(I will discuss these receptor cells shortly).
A more intense stimulus emits a greater number of photons than a less intense one in a given period of time, which means that the photopigment will absorb more photons.
On the other hand, when investigators study color perception, they refer to the absorption of light of various wavelengths.
Both approaches are correct, but obviously, they each reveal only part of the actual nature of light.

THE RECEPTIVE ORGAN 

The Eyes 

The eyes are suspended in the orbits , bony pockets in the front of the skull.
They are moved by six extraocular muscles attached to the tough, fibrous outer coat of the eye, called the sclera . 
(See Figure 6.4 ).
Normally, we cannot look behind our eyeballs and see these muscles, because their attachments to the eyes are hidden by the conjunctiva .
These mucous membranes line the eyelid and fold back to attach to the eye (thus preventing a contact lens that has slipped off the cornea from "falling behind the eye").

Figure 6.5 illustrates the external and internal anatomy of the eye. 
(See Figure 6.5 ).

The outer layer of most of the eye, the sclera, is opaque and does not permit entry of light.
However, the cornea , the outer layer at the front of the eye, is transparent and admits light.
The amount of light that enters is regulated by the size of the pupil , which is formed by the opening in the iris.
The iris consists of a ring of muscles situated behind the cornea.
It contains two bands of muscles, the dilator (whose contraction enlarges the pupil) and the sphincter (whose contraction reduces it).
The sphincter is innervated by acetylcholinergic fibers of the parasympathetic nervous system; acetylcholinergic blockers (for example, belladonna alkaloids such as atropine) thus dilate the pupil by relaxing the sphincter of the iris.
As we saw in Chapter 3, belladonna received its name from this effect.

Figure 6.3

Examples of colors with the same dominant wavelength (hue), but different saturations and brightnesses (Courtesy of Munsell Color Corporation)

The lens is situated immediately behind the iris.
It consists of a series of transparent, onionlike layers.
Its shape can be altered by contraction of the ciliary muscles .

Because of the tension of elastic fibers that suspend it, the lens is normally relatively flat.
In its flat state the lens focuses the image of distant objects on the retina , the light-sensitive tissue layer that lines the inner portion of the eye.
When the ciliary muscles contract, tension is taken off these fibers, and the lens springs back to its normally rounded shape.
Therefore, movements of the ciliary muscles determine whether the lens focuses images of near or distant objects on the retina, a process called accommodation .

Accommodation is usually integrated with convergence ("turning together") of the eyes.
When we look at a near object, the eyes turn inward, so that the two images of the object fall on corresponding portions of the retinas.
Convergence and accommodation normally occur together, so that the object on which the eyes are focused is also the object on which the eyes converge .
If you hold a pencil in front of you and focus on a distant object, you will see two blurry pencils .
If you then focus on the pencil, you will get two blurry views of the background.
Control of eye movement is a very complicated process; as we study the process, we realize that it takes a sophisticated computer to accomplish what our brain does in moving the eyes.

After passing through the lens, light traverses the main part of the eye, which contains the vitreous humor.
Vitreous humor ("glassy liquid") is a clear, gelatinous substance that gives the eye its bulk.
After passing through the vitreous humor, light falls on the retina.

In the retina are located the receptor cells, the rods and cones (named for their shapes), collectively known as photoreceptors .
The human retina contains approximately 120 million rods and 6 million cones.

Although they are greatly outnumbered, cones provide us with most of the information about our environment.
In particular, they are responsible for our daytime vision.

They provide us with information about small features in the environment and thus are the source of vision of the highest sharpness, or acuity (from acus , meaning "needle").
The fovea , or central region of the retina, which mediates our most acute vision, contains only cones.
Cones are also responsible for color vision-our ability to discriminate light of different wavelengths.

Although rods do not detect different colors and provide vision of poor acuity, they are more sensitive to light.

In a very dimly lighted environment we use our rod vision; therefore, in dim light we are color-blind and lack foveal vision.
You have probably noticed, while out on a dark night, that looking directly at a dim, distant light (that is, placing the image of the light on the fovea) causes it to disappear.

Figure 6.4

The extraocular muscles, which move the eyes.

Figure 6.5

The human eye

Another feature of the retina is the optic disk , where the axons conveying visual information gather together and leave the eye through the optic nerve.
The optic disk produces a blind spot , because no receptors are located there.
We do not normally perceive our blind spots, but their presence can be demonstrated.
If you have not found yours, you may want to try the exercise described in Figure 6.6 .

Close examination of the retina shows that it consists of several layers of neuron cell bodies, their axons and dendrites, and the photoreceptors.
Figure 6.16 illustrates a cross section through the primate retina.

The drawing includes many different types of cells, which will be described in more detail later.
Major types of cells are indicated by different colors, and within each type different subtypes are indicated by differences in shading.
The first thing to note is that the retina is divided into three main layers: the photoreceptive layer, the bipolar cell layer, and the ganglion cell layer.
Note that the photoreceptors are at the back of the retina; light must pass through the overlying layers to get to them.
Fortunately, these layers are transparent.
(Refer to Figure 6.16 ).

The photoreceptors form synapses with bipolar cells (shades of red and pink).
In turn, these neurons form synapses with the ganglion cells (shades of green), whose axons travel through the optic nerves to the brain.
In addition, the outer plexiform layer of the retina contains horizontal cells (shades of blue), and the inner plexiform layer contains amacrine cells (shades of brown), both of which transmit information in a direction parallel to the surface of the retina and thus combine messages from adjacent photoreceptors.
The functions of these connections will be described later in this chapter. 
(Refer to Figure 6.16 ).

Figure 6.6

A test for the blind spot. 

With your left eye closed, look at the + with your right eye and move the page nearer and farther from you.
When the page is about 20 cm from your face, the black circle disappears, because its image falls on the blind spot of your right eye.

Photoreceptors 

Figure 6.7 shows a drawing of a rod and a cone.
Note that each photoreceptor consists of an outer segment connected by a cilium to the inner segment, which contains the nucleus.
(See Figure 6.7 ).
The outer segment contains several hundred lamellae , thin plates of membrane.
( Lamella is the diminutive form of lamina , "thin layer").
Although the outer segments of both types of receptors are layered, there is a basic difference.
Rods contain free-floating disks, whereas the lamellae of the cones consist of one continuous, folded membrane.

The first step in the process of transduction of light involves a special chemical called a photopigment .
Photopigments consist of two parts, an opsin (a protein) and retinal (a lipid).
There are several forms of opsin; for example, the photopigment of human rods, rhodopsin , consists of rod opsin plus retinal.
( Rhod- actually refers to the Greek rhodon , "rose," and not to rod .
Before it is bleached by the action of light, rhodopsin has a pinkish hue).
Molecules of photopigments are embedded in the membrane of the lamellae; a single human rod contains approximately 10 million rhodopsin molecules.

Retinal is synthesized from retinol (vitamin A), which explains why carrots, rich in retinol, are said to be good for your eyesight.
Retinal is a molecule with a long chain that is capable of bending at a specific point.
The straight-chained form of retinal is called all-trans retinal ; the form with a bend is called 11-cis retinal .
The bent form, 11 -cis retinal, is the only form of retinal capable of attaching to rod opsin to form rhodopsin.
However, the 11 -cis form of retinal is unstable; it can exist only in the dark.
When a molecule of rhodopsin is exposed to light (that is, when it absorbs a photon), the bend in the retinal chain straightens out, and the retinal assumes the all -trans form.

Because rod opsin cannot remain attached to all -trans retinal, the rhodopsin breaks into its two constituents.
When it does so, it changes from its rosy color to a pale yellow; hence we say that the light bleaches the photopigment. 
(See Figure 6.8 ).

The splitting of the photopigment causes- a sudden decrease in the sodium permeability of the outer membrane of the photoreceptor, which hyperpolarizes the membrane.
This change in the membrane potential constitutes the receptor potential.
The system is exquisitely sensitive; the absorption of a single photon by a single molecule of photopigment can produce a detectable receptor potential.

Investigators have found that the bleaching of one rhodopsin molecule causes 50,000 molecules of cyclic GMP to disappear (Woodruff and Bownds, 1979).
You will recall from Chapter 3 that cyclic nucleotides such as cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP serve as second messengers in many neurons, mediating the postsynaptic effects of transmitter substances.
In the dark, molecules of cyclic GMP hold ion channels open in the membrane of the photoreceptor that permit sodium, magnesium, and calcium ions to enter (Yau and Baylor, 1989).
Because of the constant inflow of cations, the membrane potential is normally around - 40 mV rather than the more typical - 70 mV.
When a photon bleaches a photopigment molecule, a set of chemical reactions causes the activation of hundreds of molecules of phosphodiesterase, which, in turn, destroy thousands of molecules of cyclic GMP.
With the number of molecules of cyclic GMP diminished, many of the ion channels close.
The sodium conductivity of the membrane consequently falls, and it becomes hyperpolarized.
Eventually, the phosphodiesterase itself disappears (or is deactivated), new cyclic GMP is synthesized, and the membrane potential returns to normal. 
(See Figure 6.9 ).

Figure 6.7

Photoreceptors (Redrawn from Young, R.W., Visual cells Copyright 1970 by Scientific American, Inc All rights reserved). 

Figure 6.8

Bleaching of a photopigment.

When light strikes rhodopsin, the 11-cis retinal straightens, becoming all-trans retinal, and detaches from the rod opsin.
This event liberates energy, which initiates the steps that produce a receptor potential.

In humans and most old-world primates, photoreceptors contain four different opsins (rod opsin and three kinds of cone opsins), which bind with retinal to produce four different photopigments.
Each of these compounds most readily absorbs light of a particular wavelength.
A particular type of cone contains only one of the three cone photopigments; thus, the three cones are maximally sensitive to light of long, medium, or short wavelength.

As we shall see, the visual system uses information from these three types of cones to achieve color vision.

INTERIM SUMMARY 

Freely moving animals such as ourselves require information about the environment in order to survive.

Energy or molecules of particular chemicals cause receptor potentials in the neurons in our sensory organs.
The receptor potentials alter the rate of firing of axons that communicate sensory information to the brain.
The nervous system employs two basic schemes of sensory coding spatial coding and temporal coding.

The photoreceptors in the eyes are the rods and cones.

The extraocular muscles move the eyes so that images of the environment fall on corresponding parts of each retina.
Accommodation is accomplished by the ciliary muscles, which change the shape of the lens.

Photoreceptors communicate synaptically with bipolar cells, which communicate synaptically with ganglion cells.
In addition, horizontal cells (located in the outer plexiform layer) and amacrine cells (located in the inner plexiform layer) combine messages from adjacent photoreceptors.

Figure 6.9

Transduction: A hypothetical explanation for the production of receptor potentials in photoreceptors.

When light strikes a molecule of photopigment in a photoreceptor, the 11 -cis retinal molecule straightens out, becoming all -trans retinal, which detaches from the opsin molecule.

This detachment initiates a series of chemical reactions that result in the destruction of cyclic GMP, closing ion channels that are normally in the open state.
The decreased influx of cations produces the receptor potential-hyperpolarization of the photoreceptor membrane.

CONNECTIONS BETWEEN EYE AND BRAIN 

The best word to describe the first level of analysis of the retinal image would be mosaic .

Literally, a mosaic is a picture consisting of a large number of discrete elements-for example, bits of glass or ceramic.
The cornea and lens of the eye cast an image of the environment on the retinal photoreceptors, each of which responds to the intensity of the light that falls on it.
The connection of photoreceptors to ganglion cells (whose axons transmit visual information over the optic nerves) does not occur on a one-to-one basis.
At the periphery of the retina many individual receptors converge on a single ganglion cell.
Foveal vision is more direct, with approximately equal numbers of ganglion cells and cones.
These receptor-to-axon relationships accord very well with the fact that our foveal (central) vision is most acute, but our peripheral vision is much less precise.
In a sense, the pieces constituting the mosaic get larger as one goes from fovea to periphery, and the image transmitted to the brain becomes correspondingly cruder. 
(See Figure 6.10 ).

The retina also contains neural circuitry that encodes the visual information in a more complex way.
However, before we examine the nature of this level of coding, we should become acquainted with the anatomy of the ascending visual system.

The axons of the retinal ganglion cells ascend to the brain through the optic nerves and eventually reach the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus.
The terminal buttons of these axons form synapses with cells in this nucleus, which in turn send their axons via the optic radiations to the primary visual cortex-the region surrounding the calcarine fissure (calcarine means "spur-shaped") in the medial and posterior occipital lobe.
The primary visual cortex is often called the striate cortex because it contains a dark staining layer (striation) of cells.
(See Figure 6.11 ).

Figure 6.10

Central versus peripheral acuity.

Ganglion cells in the fovea receive input from a smaller number of photoreceptors than those in the periphery and hence provide more acute visual information.

Figure 6.12 shows a diagrammatical view of the human brain as observed from below.
The optic nerves join together at the base of the brain to form the optic chiasm (khiasma means "cross").
There, axons from ganglion cells serving the inner halves of the retina (the nasal sides) cross through the chiasm and ascend to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the opposite side of the brain.
(See Figure 6.12 ).
The lens inverts the image of the world projected on the retina (and similarly reverses left and right).
Therefore, because the axons from the nasal halves of the retinas cross to the other side of the brain, each hemisphere receives information from the contralateral half (opposite side) of the visual scene.
That is, if a person looks straight ahead, the right hemisphere receives information from the left half of the visual field, and the left hemisphere receives information from the right.
(See Figure 6.12 ).

Each dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus then projects to the ipsilateral (same-side) visual cortex; as a matter of fact, the lateral geniculate nuclei provide the only subcortical input to the primary visual cortex of primates.
Because there is a considerable amount of overlap in the visual fields of the two eyes, many cortical regions receive information about the same point in the visual field from both eyes.

Figure 6.11

A photomicrograph of a cross section through the striate cortex of a rhesus macaque monkey.

The ends of the striate cortex are shown by arrows.

From Hubel D H, and Wiesel, T N. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 1977, 298,1-59.

Control of Movement 

MUSCLES 

So far, I have described the nature of neural communication, the basic structure of the nervous system, and the physiology of perception.
Now it is time to consider the ultimate function of the nervous system: control of behavior.
The brain is the organ that moves the muscles.
It does many other things, but all of them are secondary to making our bodies move.
This chapter describes the principles of muscular contraction, some reflex circuitry within the spinal cord, and the means by which the brain initiates behaviors.
The rest of the book describes the physiology of particular categories of behaviors and the ways in which our behaviors can be modified by experience.

MUSCLES 

Mammals have three types of muscles: skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle.

Skeletal Muscle 

Skeletal muscles are the ones that move us (our skeletons) around and thus are responsible for our behavior.
Most of them are attached to bones at each end and move the bones when they contract.
(Exceptions include eye muscles and some abdominal muscles, which are attached to bone at one end only).

Muscles are fastened to bones via tendons , strong bands of connective tissue.
Several different classes of movement can be accomplished by the skeletal muscles, but I will refer principally to two of them: flexion and extension.
Contraction of a flexor muscle produces flexion , the drawing in of a limb. 
Extension , which is the opposite movement, is produced by contraction of extensor muscles.
These are the so-called antigravity muscles -the ones we use to stand up.
Then a four-legged animal lifts a paw, the movement is one of flexion.
Putting it back down is one of extension.
Sometimes, people say they "flex" their muscles.
This is an incorrect use of the term.
Muscles contract ; limbs flex .

Bodybuilders show off their arm muscles by simultaneously contracting the flexor and extensor muscles of that limb.

Anatomy 

The detailed structure of a skeletal muscle is shown in Figure 8.1 .
As you can see, it consists of two types of muscle fibers.
The extrafusal muscle fibers are served by axons of the alpha motor neurons .
Contraction of these fibers provides the muscle's motive force.
The intrafusal muscle fibers are specialized sensory organs that are served by two axons, one sensory and one motor.
(These organs are also called muscle spindles because of their shape.
In fact, the Latin word fusus means "spindle"; hence intrafusal muscle fibers are found within the spindles, and extrafusal muscle fibers are found outside them).

The central region (capsule) of the intrafusal muscle fiber contains sensory endings that are sensitive to stretch applied to the muscle fiber.

Actually, there are two types of intrafusal muscle fibers, but for simplicity's sake only one kind is shown here.
The efferent axon of the gamma motor neuron causes the intrafusal muscle fiber to contract; however, this contraction contributes an insubstantial amount of force.
As we will see, the function of this contraction is to modify the sensitivity of the fiber's afferent ending to stretch.

A single myelinated axon of an alpha motor neuron serves several extrafusal muscle fibers.
In primates the number of muscle fibers served by a single axon varies considerably, depending on the precision with which the muscle can be controlled.
In muscles that move the fingers or eyes the ratio can be less than one to ten; in muscles that move the leg it can be one to several hundred.
An alpha motor neuron, its axon, and associated extrafusal muscle fibers constitute a motor unit .

A single muscle fiber consists of a bundle of myofibrils , each of which consists of overlapping strands of actin and myosin .
The small protrusions on the myosin filaments (myosin cross bridges) are the motile elements that interact with the actin filaments and produce muscular contractions.
(See Figure 8.1 ).
The regions in which the actin and myosin filaments overlap produce dark stripes, or striations ; hence skeletal muscle is often referred to as striated muscle .

Figure 8.1

Anatomy of skeletal muscle. 

The Physical Basis of Muscular Contraction

The synapse between the terminal button of an efferent neuron and the membrane of a muscle fiber is called a neuromuscular junction .
The terminal buttons of the neurons synapse on motor endplates , located in grooves along the surface of the muscle fibers.
When an axon fires, acetylcholine is liberated by the terminal buttons and produces a depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane ( endplate potential ).
The endplate potential is much larger than an excitatory postsynaptic potential in synapses between neurons; an endplate potential always causes the muscle fiber to fire, propagating the potential along its length.
This action potential induces a contraction, or twitch , of the muscle fiber.

The depolarization of a muscle fiber opens the gates of voltage-dependent calcium channels, permitting calcium ions to enter the cytoplasm.
This event triggers the contraction.
Calcium acts as a cofactor that permits the myofibrils to extract energy from the ATP that is present in the cytoplasm.
The myosin cross bridges alternately attach to the actin strands, bend in one direction detach themselves, bend back, reattach to the actin at a point farther down the strand, and so on Thus, the cross bridges "row" along the actin filaments.
Figure 8.2 illustrates this rowing sequence and shows how this sequence results in shortening the muscle fiber.
(See Figure 8.2 ).

A single impulse of a motor neuron produces 2 single twitch of a muscle fiber.
The physical effects of the twitch last considerably longer than will the action potential, because of the elasticity of the muscle and the time required to rid the cell of calcium.
(Like sodium, calcium is actively extruded by a pump situated in the membrane).
Figure 8.3 shows how the physical effects of a series of action potentials can overlap, causing a sustained contraction by the muscle fiber.
A single motor unit in a leg muscle of a cat can raise a 100-gram weight, which attests to the remarkable strength of the contractile mechanism.
(See Figure 8.3 ).

As you know from your own experience, muscular contraction is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon, as are the twitches of the constituent muscle fibers.
Obviously, strength of muscular contraction is determined by the average rate of firing of the various motor units.
If, at a given moment, many units are firing, the contraction will be forceful.
If few are firing, the contraction will be weak.

Figure 8.2

The mechanism by which muscles contract.

Location of the myosin cross bridges.
The myosin cross bridges performing "rowing" movements, which cause the actin and myosin filaments to move relative to each other.
Adapted from Anthony, CP, and Kolthoff, N.J. Textbook of Anatomy and Physiology, 8th ed St Louis: C.V. Mosby, 1971.

Sensory Feedback from Muscles 

As we saw, the intrafusal muscle fibers contain sensory endings that are sensitive to stretch.
The intrafusal muscle fibers are arranged in parallel with the extrafusal muscle fibers.
Therefore, they are stretched when the muscle lengthens and are relaxed when it shortens.
Thus, even though these afferent neurons are stretch receptors , they serve as muscle length detectors .
This distinction is important.
Stretch receptors are also located within the tendons, in the Golgi tendon organ .

Figure 8.3

Action potentials and contractions. 

A rapid succession of action potentials can cause a muscle fiber to produce a sustained contraction.
Each dot represents an individual action potential.
Adapted from Devanandan, MS, Eccles, RM, and Westerman, RA.
Journal of Physiology (London), 1965, 178, 359-367.

Figure 8.4

Effects of arm movements on the firing of muscle and tendon afferent axons. 

Slow passive extension of the arm.
Rapid extension of the arm.
Addition of a weight to an arm held in a horizontal position.
MS1 and MS2 are two types of muscle spindles; GTO is an afferent fiber from the Golgi tendon organ.

These receptors detect the total amount of stretch exerted by the muscle, through its tendons, on the bones to which the muscle is attached.
The stretch receptors of the Golgi tendon organ encode the degree of stretch by the rate of firing.
They respond not to a muscle's length but to how hard it is pulling.
ln contrast, the receptors on intrafusal muscle fibers detect muscle length, not tension.
Figure 8.4 shows the response of afferent axons of the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organ to various types of movements.
Figure 8.4a shows the effects of passive lengthening of muscles, the kind of movement that would be seen if your forearm, held in a completely relaxed fashion, were slowly lowered by someone who was supporting it.
The rate of firing of one type of muscle spindle afferent neuron (MS1) increases, while the activity of the afferent of the Golgi tendon organ (GTO) remains unchanged.
(See Figure 8.4a ).
Figure 8.4b shows the results when the arm is dropped quickly; note that this time the second type of muscle spindle afferent neuron (MS2) fires a rapid burst of impulses.
This fiber, then, signals rapid changes in muscle length.
(See Figure 8.4b ).
Figure 8.4c shows what would happen if a weight were suddenly dropped into your hand while your forearm was held parallel to the ground.

Neurons MS1 and MS2 (especially MS2, which responds to rapid changes in muscle length) briefly fire, because your arm lowers briefly and then comes back to the original position.
The Golgi tendon organ, monitoring the strength of contraction, fires in proportion to the stress on the muscle, so it increases its rate of firing as soon as the weight is added.
(See Figure 8.4c ).

Smooth Muscle 

Our bodies contain two types of smooth muscle , both of which are controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
Multiunit smooth muscles are found in large arteries, around hair follicles (where they produce piloerection , or fluffing of fur), and in the eye (controlling lens adjustment and pupillary dilation).
This type of smooth muscle is normally inactive, but it will contract in response to neural stimulation or to certain hormones.

In contrast, single-unit smooth muscles normally contract in a rhythmical fashion.
Some of these cells spontaneously produce pacemaker potentials , which we can regard as self-initiated excitatory postsynaptic potentials.
These slow potentials elicit action potentials, which are propagated by adjacent smooth muscle fibers, causing a wave of muscular contraction.
The efferent nerve supply (and various hormones) can modulate the rhythmical rate, increasing or decreasing it.
Single-unit smooth muscles are found chiefly in the gastrointestinal system, uterus, and small blood vessels.

Cardiac Muscle 

As its name implies, cardiac muscle is found in the heart.
This type of muscle looks somewhat like striated muscle but acts like single-unit smooth muscle.
The heart beats regularly, even if it is denervated.
Neural activity and certain hormones (especially the catecholamines) serve to modulate the heart rate.
A group of cells in the pacemaker of the heart are rhythmically active and initiate the contractions of cardiac muscle that constitute the heartbeat.

INTERIM SUMMARY 

Our bodies possess skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle.
Skeletal muscles contain extrafusal muscle fibers, which provide the force of contraction.

The alpha motor neurons form synapses with the extrafusal muscle fibers and control their contraction.
Skeletal muscles also contain intrafusal muscle fibers, which detect changes in muscle length.
The length of the intrafusal muscle fiber, and hence its sensitivity to increases in muscle length, is controlled by the gamma motor neuron .
Besides the intrafusal muscle fibers, the muscles contain stretch receptors in the Golgi tendon organs, located at the ends of the muscles.

The force of muscular contraction is provided by long protein molecules called actin and myosin, arranged in overlapping parallel arrays.
When an action potential, initiated by the synapse at the motor endplate causes Ca2+ to enter the muscle fiber, the myofibrils extract energy from ATP and cause a twitch of the muscle fiber, producing a ratchetlike "rowing" movement of the myosin cross bridges.

Smooth muscle is controlled by the autonomic nervous system through direct neural connections and indirectly through the endocrine system.
Multiunit smooth muscles contract only in response to neural or hormonal stimulation.
In contrast, singleunit smooth muscles normally contract rhythmically, but their rate is controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
Cardiac muscle also contracts spontaneously, and its rate of contraction, too, is influenced by the autonomic nervous system.

REFLEX CONTROL OF MOVEMENT 

Although behaviors are controlled by the brain, the spinal cord possesses a certain degree of autonomy.

Particular kinds of somatosensory stimuli can elicit rapid responses through neural connections located within the spinal cord.
These reflexes constitute the simplest level of motor integration.

The Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex 

The activity of the simplest functional neural pathway in the body is easy to demonstrate.
Sit on a surface high enough to allow your legs to dangle freely and have someone lightly tap your patellar tendon, just below the kneecap.
This stimulus briefly stretches your quadriceps muscle, on the top of your thigh.
The stretch causes the muscle to contract, which makes your leg kick forward. 
(I am sure few of you will bother with this demonstration, because you are already familiar with it; most physical examinations include a test of this reflex).
The time interval between the tendon tap and the start of the leg extension is about 50 milliseconds.

That interval is too short for the involvement of the brain; it would take considerably longer for sensory information to be relayed to the brain and for motor information to be relayed back.
For example, suppose a person is asked to move his or her leg as quickly as possible after being touched on the knee.
This response would not be reflexive but would involve sensory and motor mechanisms of the brain.
In this case the interval between the stimulus and the start of the response would be several times greater than the time required for the patellar reflex.

Obviously, the patellar reflex as such has no utility; no selective advantage is bestowed upon animals that kick a limb when a tendon is tapped.
However, if a more natural stimulus is applied, the utility of this mechanism becomes apparent.
Figure 8.5 shows the effects of placing a weight in a person' s hand.
This time I have included a piece of the spinal cord, with its roots, to show the neural circuit that composes the monosynaptic stretch reflex .
First, follow the circuit: Starting at the muscle spindle, afferent impulses are conducted to ferent impulses are conducted to terminal buttons in the gray matter of the spinal cord.
These terminal buttons synapse on an alpha motor neuron that innervates the extrafusal muscle fibers of the same muscle.
Only one synapse is encountered along the route from receptor to effector-hence the term monosynaptic .
(See Figure 8.5 ).

Now consider a useful function this reflex performs.
If the weight the person is holding is increased, the forearm begins to move down.
This movement lengthens the muscle and increases the firing rate of the muscle spindle afferent neurons, whose terminal buttons then stimulate the alpha motor neurons, increasing their rate of firing.
Consequently, the strength of the muscular contraction increases, and the arm pulls the weight up.
(See Figure 8.5 ).

Figure 8.5

The monosynaptic stretch reflex: (a) Neural circuit, (b) A useful function. 

Another important role played by the monosynaptic stretch reflex is control of posture.
In order to stand, we must keep our center of gravity above our feet, or we will fall.
As we stand, we tend to oscillate back and forth, and from side to side.
Our vestibular sacs and our visual system play an important role in the maintenance of posture.
However, these systems are aided by the activity of the monosynaptic stretch reflex.
For example, consider what happens when a person begins to lean forward.
The large calf muscle (gastrocnemius) is stretched, and this stretching elicits compensatory muscular contraction that pushes the toes down, thus restoring upright posture.
(See Figure 8.6 ).

Figure 8.6

The role of the monosynaptic stretch reflex in postural control. 

The Gamma Motor System 

The muscle spindles are very sensitive to changes in muscle length; they will increase their rate of firing when the muscle is lengthened by a very small amount.
The interesting thing is that this detection mechanism is adjustable.
Remember that the ends of the intrafusal muscle fibers can be contracted by activity of the associated efferent axons of the gamma motor neurons; their rate of firing determines the degree of contraction.
When the muscle spindles are relaxed, they are relatively insensitive to stretch.
However, when the gamma motor neurons are active, they become shorter and hence become much more sensitive to changes in muscle length.
This property of adjustable sensitivity simplifies the role of the brain in controlling movement.
The more control that can occur in the spinal cord, the fewer messages must be sent to and from the brain.

We already saw that the afferent axons of the muscle spindle help maintain limb position even when the load carried by the limb is altered.
Efferent control of the muscle spindles permits these muscle length detectors to assist in changes in limb position, as well.
Consider a single muscle spindle.
When its efferent axon is completely silent, the spindle is completely relaxed and extended.
As the firing rate of the efferent axon increases, the spindle gets shorter and shorter.
If, simultaneously, the rest of the entire muscle also gets shorter, there will be no stretch on the central region that contains the sensory endings, and the afferent axon will not respond.
However, if the muscle spindle contracts faster than does the muscle as a whole, there will be a considerable amount of afferent activity.

The motor system makes use of this phenomenon in the following way: When commands from the brain are issued to move a limb, both the alpha motor neurons and the gamma motor neurons are activated.
The alpha motor neurons start the muscle contracting.
If there is little resistance, both the extrafusal and the intrafusal muscle fibers will contract at approximately the same rate, and little activity will be seen from the afferent axons of the muscle spindle.
However, if the limb meets with resistance, the intrafusal muscle fibers will shorten more than the extrafusal muscle fibers, and hence sensory axons will begin to fire and cause the monosynaptic stretch reflex to strengthen the contraction.
Thus, the brain makes use of the gamma motor system in moving the limbs.
By establishing a rate of firing in the gamma motor system , the brain controls the length of the muscle spindles and, indirectly, the length of the entire muscle.

Physiologists formerly thought that only the gamma motor neurons were activated to initiate movements, and that the alpha motor neurons were stimulated solely by the afferent axons of the muscle spindles.
However, Vallbo (1971) put small electrodes into his own peripheral nerves and found that when he contracted the muscle that was innervated by the nerve, the contraction always preceded the activity of the afferent axon of the muscle spindle.
Thus, the alpha motor neurons must have been activated directly by the brain, because the movement started before the afferent impulses were observed.
(See Figure 8.7 ).

Figure 8.7

Evidence that the muscle begins moving before action potentials occur in the sensory endings of the muscle spindle.

This evidence proves that the alpha motor neurons directly initiate the movement.
From Vallbo, A B Journal of Physiology (London), 1971, 218, 405-431.

Polysynaptic Reflexes 

The monosynaptic stretch reflex is the only spinal reflex that we know of that involves only one synapse.
All others are polysynaptic .
Examples include relatively simple ones, like limb withdrawal in response to pain, and relatively complex ones, like the ejaculation of semen.
Spinal reflexes do not exist in isolation; they are normally controlled by the brain.
For example, Chapter 2 described how inhibition from the brain can prevent a person from dropping a bunch of roses with thorns, even though the painful stimuli received by the fingers serve to cause reflexive extension of the fingers.
This section will describe some general principles by which polysynaptic spinal reflexes operate.

Before I begin the discussion, I should mention that the simple circuit diagrams used here (including the one you just looked at in Figure 8.5) are much too simple.
Reflex circuits are typically shown as a single chain of neurons, but in reality most reflexes involve thousands of neurons.
Each axon usually synapses on many neurons, and each neuron receives synapses from many different axons.

As we previously saw, the afferent axons from the Golgi tendon organ serve as detectors of muscle stretch.
There are two populations of afferent axons from the Golgi tendon organ, with different sensitivities to stretch.

The more sensitive afferent axons tell the brain how hard the muscle is pulling.
The less sensitive ones have an additional function.
Their terminal buttons synapse on spinal cord interneurons , neurons that reside entirely within the gray matter of the spinal cord and serve to interconnect other spinal neurons.
These interneurons synapse on the alpha motor neurons serving the same muscle.
The terminal buttons liberate glycine and hence produce inhibitory postsynaptic potentials on the motor neurons.
(See Figure 8.8 ).
The function of this reflex pathway is to decrease the strength of muscular contraction when there is danger of damage to the tendons or bones to which the muscles are attached.
Weight lifters can lift heavier weights: their Golgi tendon organs are deactivated with injections of a local anesthetic, but they run the risk of pulling the tendon away from the bone or even breaking the bone.

The discovery of the inhibitory Golgi tendon organ reflex provided the first real evidence of neural inhibition, long before the synaptic mechanisms were understood.
A decerebrate cat, whose brain stem has been cut through, exhibits a phenomenon known as decerebrate rigidity .
The animal's back is arched, and its legs are extended stiffly from its body.

This rigidity results from excitation originating in the caudal reticular formation, which greatly facilitates all stretch reflexes, especially of extensor muscles, by increasing the activity of the gamma motor system.

Rostral to the brain stem transection is an inhibitory region of the reticular formation, which normally counterbalances the excitatory one.
The transection removes the inhibitory influence, leaving only the excitatory one.
If you attempt to flex the outstretched leg of a decerebrate cat, you will meet with increasing resistance, which suddenly melts away, allowing the limb to flex.
It almost feels as though you were closing the blade of a pocketknife-hence the term clasp- knife reflex .
The sudden release is, of course, mediated by activation of the Golgi tendon organ reflex.

Figure 8.8

Polysynaptic inhibitory reflex. 

Input from the Golgi tendon organ can cause inhibitory postsynaptic potentials to occur on the alpha motor neuron.

Even the monosynaptic stretch reflex serves as the basis of polysynaptic reflexes.
Muscles are arranged in opposing pairs.
The agonist moves the limb in the direction being studied, and because muscles cannot push back, the antagonist muscle must move the limb back in the opposite direction.

Consider this finding: When a stretch reflex is elicited in the agonist, it contracts quickly, thus causing the antagonist to lengthen.
It would appear, then, that the antagonist is presented with a stimulus that should elicit its stretch reflex.
And yet the antagonist relaxes instead.
Let us see why.

Afferent axons of the muscle spindles, besides sending terminal buttons to the alpha motor neuron and to the brain, also synapse on inhibitory interneurons.
The terminal buttons of these interneurons synapse on the alpha motor neurons that innervate the antagonistic muscle.
(See Figure 8.9 ).
Thus, a stretch reflex excites the agonist and inhibits the antagonist , so that the limb can move in the direction controlled by the stimulated muscle.

Figure 8.9

Secondary reflexes.

Firing of the muscle spindle causes excitation on the alpha motor neuron of the agonist and inhibition on the antagonist.

Reproductive Behavior: Sexual Development and Behavior 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT 

Reproductive behaviors constitute the most important category of social behaviors, because without them most species would not survive.
Reproductive behaviors-including courting, mating, parental behavior, and most forms of aggressive behaviors-are the most striking categories of sexually dimorphic behaviors , that is, behaviors that differ in males and females ( di + morphous , "two forms").
As you will see, hormones play a very special role in the control of these behaviors-more so than in any others.
Although hormones affect many physiological processes, their effects on behaviors are generally indirect; that is, the hormones affect some physiological characteristics of the body, and these changes affect behavior.
In contrast, the hormones that affect sexually dimorphic behaviors do so directly, by stimulating neurons in the central nervous system that control these behaviors.
Thus, sexual dimorphism in behavior is largely accomplished by the existence of different levels of sex hormones in males and females.

This chapter begins by discussing sexual development, sexual behavior, and the effects of hormones on both development and behavior.
Next, the chapter discusses evidence concerning the neural control of sexual behavior and the ways in which hormones interact with the nervous system to affect behavior.

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT 

A person's chromosomal sex is determined at the time of fertilization.
However, this event is merely the first in a series of steps that culminate in the development of a male or female.
This section considers the major features of sexual development.

Production of Gametes and Fertilization 

All cells of the body (other than sperms or ova) contain twenty-three pairs of chromosomes, including a pair of sex chromosomes.
The genetic information that programs the development of a human is contained in the DNA that constitutes these chromosomes.
(We pride ourselves on our Ability to miniaturize computer circuits on silicon chips; but that accomplishment looks primitive when we consider the blueprint for a human being, which is too small to be seen by the naked eye).
The nature of the sex chromosomes determines an individual's sex.
There are two types of these chromosomes: X and Y chromosomes.

The cells of females contain two of one type, making them XX cells.
The cells of males contain one of each, making them XY cells.
Thus, it is the possession of a Y chromosome that distinguishes the cells of a male from those of a female.

We can observe the twenty-three pairs of human chromosomes by scraping epithelial cells from the mucous membrane of the inside of the cheek.
Among these cells will be some that are in the process of division.
During cell division, which is called mitosis , the chromosomes duplicate themselves, thus giving each of the two daughter cells the entire complement of genetic material.
(When cells divide, the products of the division are called daughter cells , regardless of the sex of the donor).
Figure 10.1 shows this process.
For simplicity's sake, the cells shown in the figure contain only two pairs of chromosomes, rather than twenty-three. 
(See Figure 10.1 ).
Once cellular division has begun, the culture is treated with colchicine, a drug that dissolves the spindle fibers that pull the chromosomes apart and thus halts the process in the phase shown in part C.
(See Figure 10.1 ).

The dividing cells now contain a double set of twenty-three pairs of chromosomes in the nucleus, straightened out and easy to see.
The cells are then squashed, so as to flatten the chromosomes, and the genetic material is stained.
Then many cells are searched until one is found in which all the chromosomes can readily be seen.
A photograph is taken, and pictures of the individual chromosomes are cut out and rearranged according to size.
Thus, the numbers assigned to the chromosomes represent their relative sizes.
Figure 10.2 illustrates a set of human chromosomes prepared in this way, before and after rearrangement.
Remember that we can see twice as many chromosomes as the cell normally contains, because the process of cell division was arrested just before the members of a duplicated chromosome, joined near the center, would normally separate and travel to each of the daughter cells.
We know that the cell shown in this figure came from a male, because we can see a Y chromosome (the smallest chromosome of all).
(See Figure 10.2 ).

Figure 10.1

Mitosis, the process by which a somatic cell replicates itself (From Orians, GH, The Study of Life. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1973) 

The production of gametes (ova and sperms; gamein means "to marry") entails a different form of cell division, called meiosis .
This process produces cells that contain only one member of each of the twenty-three pairs of chromosomes.
The development of a human begins when a single sperm and ovum join, sharing their twenty-three single chromosomes to reconstitute the twenty-three pairs. Somehow, each chromosome finds its partner and joins it.

Fertilization is the union of a single sperm with a single ovum, thus combining their genetic material.
Because women have XX cells, all of their ova contain a single X chromosome (along with twenty-two other single chromosomes, of course).
Because men have XY cells, half of their sperms are X bearing and half are Y bearing.
Thus, the gender of the offspring is determined by the sperm that fertilizes the ovum.
If it is X bearing, the offspring will be female.
If it is Y bearing, it will be male.
(See Figure 10.3 ).

Development of the Gonads 

Men and women differ in many ways: Their bodies are different, parts of their brains are different, and their reproductive behaviors are different.
Are all these differences encoded on the tiny Y chromosome, the sole piece of genetic material that distinguishes males from females?
The answer is no.
The cells of both males and females contain the genetic information needed to develop the bodies of either sex.
It is the hormonal exposure, both before and after birth, that is responsible for our sexual dimorphism.

The first sex organs to differentiate are the gonads (from the Greek gonos , meaning "procreation"), which become ovaries or testes.
At first, male and female embryos are identical.

Their gonads, which begin developing during the fifth and sixth week after the mother's last menstrual cycle, are undifferentiated.
In this state they. are referred to as primordial gonads (primordial means "first begun").
But during the seventh and eighth weeks the gonads differentiate; either the cells of the cortex (the outer lavers) develop into ovaries, or the cells of the medulla (the inner layers) develop into testes.
(See Figure 10.4 ).

Figure 10.2

A karyotype of a cell whose division was arrested in metaphase (phase C of Figure 10.1) (From Money, J,and Ehrhardt,A Man and Woman, Boy and Girl, Copyright l972 by The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, By permission)

The differentiation of the primordial gonads is controlled by the presence or absence of a protein called the H-Y antigen (Haseltine and Ohno, 1981).
This protein was discovered by researchers investigating the factors that control the compatibility of different tissues with respect to transplantation.

They discovered that female mice would reject grafts of skin from males because an antigen (a type of protein) was present on the surface of male cells.
Further studies found that the important function of the H-Y antigen is an organizational effect on cells of the primordial gonads.
When it stimulates receptors on the surface of these cells, it causes the gonads to develop as testes.

If the protein is not present, or if an experimenter administers an antibody to the H-Y antigen, the primordial gonads develop into ovaries.
As you may have expected, production of the H-Y antigen is controlled by a gene on the Y chromosome.

Development of the Internal Sex Organs 

Figure 10.3

Determination of gender.

The gender of the offspring depends on whether the sperm cell that fertilizes the ovum carries an X or a Y chromosome.

Figure 10.4

Development of the gonads (testes and ovaries)

Adapted from Burns, RK, in Analysis of Development, edited by BH Willier, PA Weiss, and V. Hamberger.

Philadelphia: Saunders, 1955.

The production of H-Y antigen, and the ensuing development of testes, is the sole effect of the Y chromosome that is known to directly affect sexual development.
Once the gonads have developed, a series of events is set into action that determines the individual's gender.
These events are directed by hormones secreted by the gonads and, later, by other endocrine glands as well.
These hormones affect sexual development (and, as we shall see later, sexual behavior as well) in two ways.
During prenatal development they have organizational effects , which influence the development of a person's sex organs and brain.
The second role of sex hormones is their activational effect .
For example, hormones activate the production of sperms, make erection and ejaculation possible, and induce ovulation.
Because the bodies of adult males and females have been organized differently, sex hormones will have different activational effects in the two sexes.

As we just saw, prior to the seventh week the embryonic gonads are unisexual but bipotential , capable of assuming either form.
In contrast, the other internal sex organs are bisexual ; that is, all embryos contain the precursors for both female and male sex organs.
However, during the third month of gestation only one of these precursors develops; the other withers away.
The precursor of the internal female sex organs, which develops into the fimbriae and Fallopian tubes , the uterus , and the inner two- thirds of the vagina , is called the Mullerian system .
(See Figure 10.5 ).
The precursor of the internal male sex organs, which develops into the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles , and prostate , is called the Wolffian system .
(See Figure 10.5 ).

The gender of the internal sex organs of a fetus is determined by the presence or absence of testes.
That is, if testes are present, the Wolffian system develops.
If they are not, the Mullerian system develops.
The Mullerian (female) system needs no hormonal stimulus from the gonads to develop; it just normally does so.
In contrast, the cells of the Wolffian (male) system do not develop unless they are stimulated by a hormone.
Thus, testes secrete two classes of hormones.
A peptide hormone called Mullerian-inhibiting substance does exactly, what its name says: It prevents the Mullerian system from developing.
It therefore has a defeminizing effect . 
Androgens (primarily testosterone and dihydrotestosterone) stimulate the development of the Wolffian system.
(This class of hormone is also aptly named: andros means "man," and gennan means "to produce").
Androgens have a masculinizing effect .

As you will recall from Chapter 3, hormones exert their effects on target cells by stimulating the appropriate hormone receptor.
Thus, the precursor of the male internal sex organs, the Wolffian system, contain androgen receptors that are coupled to cellular mechanisms that promote growth and division.
In contrast, the cells of the Mullerian system contain receptors for Mullerian-inhibiting substance that somehow prevent growth and division.

Experiments with laboratory animals have shown that ovaries are not necessary for the development of the Mullerian system.
This finding has led to the dictum "Nature's impulse is to create a female".
A genetic anomaly demonstrates the validity of this statement in humans.
People with Turner's syndrome have only one sex chromosome: an X chromosome.
(Thus, instead of having XX cells, they have X0 cells).

Apparently, the ovum that gives rise to such an individual is fertilized by a sperm that lost its sex chromosome during meiosis.
Because a Y chromosome is not present, H-Y antigen is not produced, and testes do not develop.
In addition, because only one X chromosome is present, ovaries are not produced, either.
(For some reason, two X chromosomes are needed to produce ovaries.) Even though they have no gonads at all, people with Turner's syndrome develop into females, with normal female internal sex organs.
Of course, they cannot bear children, because without ovaries they cannot produce ova.

Development of the External Genitalia 

The external genitalia are the visible sex organs, including the penis and scrotum in males and the labia, clitoris, and outer part of the vagina in females.

Whereas male and female internal sex organs develop from two different sets of precursors, the external genitalia, like the gonads, develop from a single set of bipotential primordia, capable of assuming either male or female form.
Figure 10.6 illustrates the development of male and female external genitalia from the bipotential genital primordia.
Note that the primordial phallus gives rise to the glans penis or to the clitoris; the genital swelling gives rise to the scrotum or to the labia majora; and the genital tubercle gives rise to the shaft of the penis or to the labia minora and outer third of the vagina. 
(See Figure 10.6 ).

Figure 10.5

Development of the internal sex organs (Adapted from Corning, H K Lehrbuch der Entwicklungsgeschichte des Menschen, Munich: J.F. Bergman, 1921 )

Without hormonal stimulation the external genitalia will become female, regardless of the organism's chromosomal sex; female sex hormones are not needed.
However, the presence of androgens is necessary for masculine development.
Thus, the presence or absence of testes determines whether a person's external genitalia are male or female.
As you might predict, therefore, people with Turner's syndrome have female external genitalia even though they lack ovaries.

Figure 10.6

Development of the external genitalia.

Adapted from Spaulding, MH, in Contributions to Embryology, Vol. 13.
Washington, D C: Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1921.

Figure 10.7 summarizes the factors that control the development of the gonads, internal sex organs, and genitalia. 
(See Figure 10.7 ).

Sexual Maturation 

The primary sex characteristics include the gonads, internal sex organs, and external genitalia.

These organs are present at birth.
The secondary sex characteristics, such as enlarged breasts and widened hips or a beard and deep voice, do not appear until puberty.
Without seeing genitals, we must guess the sex of a prepubescent child from his or her haircut and clothing; the bodies of young boys and girls are rather similar.
However, at puberty the gonads are stimulated to produce their hormones, and these hormones cause the person to mature sexually.
The onset of puberty occurs when cells in the hypothalamus secrete gonadotropin-releasing hormones (GnRH), which stimulate the production and release of two gonadotropic hormones by the anterior pituitary gland.
The gonadotropic ("gonad-turning") hormones stimulate the gonads to produce their hormones, which are ultimately responsible for sexual maturation. 
(See Figure 10.8 ).

The two gonadotropic hormones are follicle- stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), named for the effects they produce in the female (production of a follicle and its subsequent luteinization , to be described in the next section of this chapter).
However, the same hormones are produced in the male, Where they stimulate the testes to produce sperms and to secrete testosterone.
If male and female pituitary glands are exchanged in rats, the ovaries and testes respond perfectly to the hormones secreted by the new glands (Harris and Jacobson, 1951- 1952).

Figure 10.7

Hormonal control of masculinization and defeminization of the internal sex organs and external genitalia. 

In response to the gonadotropic hormones (usually called gonadotropins ), the gonads secrete sex steroid hormones.
The ovaries produce estradiol , one of a class of hormones known as estrogens .
The testes chiefly produce testosterone (an androgen).

Both types of glands also produce a small amount of the hormones of the other sex.
The gonadal hormones have effects on many parts of the body.
Both estradiol and testosterone initiate closure of the epiphyses (growing portions of the bones) and thus halt skeletal growth.
Estradiol also causes breast development, growth of the lining of the uterus, changes in the deposition of body fat, and maturation of the female genitalia.
Testosterone stimulates growth of facial, axillary (underarm), and pubic hair; lowers the voice; alters the hairline on the head (often causing baldness later in life); stimulates muscular development; and causes genital growth.
This description leaves out two of the female secondary characteristics: axillary and pubic hair.
These characteristics are produced not by estrogens but rather by androstenedione , an androgen secreted by the cortex of the adrenal glands.
Even a male who is castrated (whose testes are removed) before puberty will grow axillary and pubic hair, stimulated by his own androstenedione.
(See Table 10.1 ).

Figure 10.8

Sexual maturation. 

Puberty is initiated when the hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormones.

Table 10.1

Classification of sex hormones

The bipotentiality of many of the secondary sex characteristics remains throughout life.
If a man is treated with an estrogen (for example, to control an androgen-dependent tumor), he will grow breasts, and his facial hair will become finer and softer.
However, his voice will remain low, because the enlargement of the larynx is permanent.
Conversely, a woman who receives high levels of an androgen (usually from a tumor that secretes androstenedione) will grow a beard, and her voice will become lower.

INTERIM SUMMARY 

Gender is determined by the sex chromosomes: XX produces a female, and XY produces a male.
Males are produced by the action of a gene on the Y chromosome that contains the code for the production of a protein, the H-Y antigen, that causes the primordial gonads to become testes.
The testes secrete two kinds of hormones that cause a male to develop.
Androgens stimulate the development of the Wolffian system (masculinization), and Mullerian-inhibiting substance suppresses the development of the Mullerian system (defeminization).
The external genitalia develop from common precursors.
ln the absence of gonadal hormones the precursors develop the female form; in the presence of androgens they develop the male form (masculinization).
By default, the body is female ("Nature's impulse"); only by the actions of testicular hormones does it become male.
Masculinization and defeminization are referred to as organizational effects of hormones; activational effects occur after development is complete.
A person with Turner's syndrome (XO) fails to develop gonads but nevertheless develops female internal sex organs and external genitalia.

Sexual maturity occurs when the hypothalamus begins secreting gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone by the anterior pituitary gland.

These hormones stimulate the gonads to secrete their hormones, which cause the genitals to mature and cause the body to develop the secondary sex characteristics (activational effects).

HORMONAL CONTROL OF SEX-RELATED BEHAVIOR 

We have seen that hormones are responsible for sexual dimorphism (male-female differences) in the structure of the body and its organs.
Hormones have organizational and activational effects on the internal sex organs, genitals, and secondary sex characteristics.
Naturally, all of these effects influence a person's behavior.
Simply having the physique and genitals of a man or a woman exerts a powerful effect.
But hormones do more than give us masculine or feminine bodies; they also affect behavior by interacting directly with the nervous system.
Androgens present during prenatal development affect the development of the nervous system.
In addition, sex hormones have activational effects on the adult nervous system, influencing physiological processes and behavior.
This section considers some of these effects.

Hormonal Control of Female Reproductive Cycles 

Menstrual and Estrous Cycles 

The reproductive cycle of female primates is called a menstrual cycle (from mensis , meaning "month").
Females of other species of mammals also have reproductive cycles, called estrous cycles .
Estrus means "gadfly"; when a female rat is in estrus, her hormonal condition goads her to act differently than she does at other times.
(For that matter, it goads male rats to act differently, too).
The primary feature that distinguishes menstrual cycles from estrous cycles is the monthly growth and loss of the lining of the uterus.
The other features are approximately the same.

Menstrual cycles and estrous cycles consist of a sequence of events that are controlled by hormonal secretions of the pituitary gland and ovaries.
These glands interact, the secretions of one affecting those of the other.
A cycle begins with the secretion of gonadotropins by the anterior pituitary gland.
These hormones (especially FSH) stimulate the growth of ovarian follicles , small spheres of epithelial cells surrounding each ovum.
Women normally produce one ovarian follicle each month; if two are produced and fertilized, dizygotic (fraternal) twins will develop.
As ovarian follicles mature, they secrete estradiol, which causes the growth of the lining of the uterus in preparation for implantation of the ovum, should it be fertilized by a sperm.
Feedback from the increasing level of estradiol eventually triggers the release of a surge of LH by the anterior pituitary gland.
(See Figure 10.9 ).

The LH surge causes ovulation :
The ovarian follicle ruptures, releasing the ovum.
Under the continued influence of LH the ruptured ovarian follicle becomes a corpus luteum ("yellow body"), which produces estradiol and progesterone .
(See Figure 10.9 ).
The latter hormone promotes pregnancy ( gestation ).
It maintains the lining of the uterus, and it inhibits the ovaries from producing another follicle.
Meanwhile, the ovum, which is released directly into the fluid contained in the abdominal cavity, enters one of the Fallopian tubes and begins its progress toward the uterus.
The ovum is directed into the Fallopian tube by the "rowing" action of the ciliated cells of the fimbria, which form a fringe around the opening.
This process works remarkably well; women who have lost an ovary on one side and a Fallopian tube on the other have nevertheless become pregnant.

Obviously, their ova had to find their way across the abdominal cavity and into the Fallopian tube on the other side.
If an ovum meets sperm cells during its travel down the Fallopian tube and becomes fertilized, it begins to divide, and several days later it attaches itself to the uterine wall.

If the ovum is not fertilized, or if it is fertilized too late for it to develop sufficiently by the time it gets to the uterus, the corpus luteum will stop producing estradiol and progesterone, and the lining of the walls of the uterus will slough off.
Menstruation will commence.
(See Figure 10.10 ).

Control of Gonadotropin 

Secretion by the Ovaries 

As we have just seen, ovulation occurs when the blood level of estradiol, secreted by an ovarian follicle, reaches a critical level.
In primates this effect of estradiol takes place in the anterior pituitary gland.

The anterior pituitary gland is controlled by the hypothalamus, which secretes releasing hormones into the portal blood supply.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which controls the secretion of gonadotropins, is produced by neurons located in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, which forms a small arch around the base of the pituitary stalk.
These neurons are controlled by an internal clock that stimulates them to secrete a pulse of GnRH every hour, causing the anterior pituitary gland to release similar pulses of gonadotropins (Pohl and Knobil, 1982).
(See Figure 10.11 ).
For some reason the timing of the clock is important; if pulses of GnRH occur too fast or too slow, normal 28-day menstrual cycles will not occur (Knobil, 1987).
The clock is present in primates at birth but soon stops, only to be started again at the time of puberty (Plant, 1986).

Figure 10.10

The hormonal and physical elements of the menstrual cycle.

During the early part of the menstrual cycle the gonadotropins secreted by the anterior pituitary gland stimulate the development of an ovarian follicle.
The cells of the ripening ovarian follicle secrete estradiol; when the blood level of this hormone reaches a critical level of 200 pg/ml for two days, it stimulates a surge of gonadotropins, which causes ovulation.
(A picogram, abbreviated pg, is one trillionth of a gram).
The estradiol acts directly on the pituitary gland, stimulating it to produce the preovulatory LH surge.

The arcuate nucleus continues to secrete pulses of GnRH even after ovulation has occurred.
However, the progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum inhibits the effects of the gonadotropins on the ovaries and prevents another ovarian follicle from developing.
If fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum dies in approximately 14 days, and the level of progesterone falls.
As we saw, this fall causes the lining of the uterus to slough off.
It also removes the inhibiting effect of progesterone on the ovaries, which permits the development of a new ovarian follicle.
Thus, the length of a menstrual cycle is controlled by the ovaries; it takes 14 days for a new ovarian follicle to develop and produce a critical amount of estradiol, and a corpus luteum lives and produces progesterone for 14 days more.

Figure 10.11

Cyclic changes in multiple-unit activity in the arcuate nucleus (color), and plasma levels of luteinizing hormone (black).

An internal clock appears to control the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).
Adapted from Wilson, RC, Kesner, JS, Kaufman, JM, Uemura, T, Akema, T, and Knobil, E. Neuroendocrinology, 1984, 39, 256-260.

With permission of S. Karger AG, Basel.

Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior of Laboratory Animals 

The interactions between sex hormones and development of the human brain are difficult to study.
We must turn to two sources of information: experiments with animals and various developmental disorders in humans, which serve as nature's own "experiments".
Let us first consider the evidence gathered from research with laboratory animals.

Male Sexual Behavior 

For fertilization to occur, a male mammal must emit sperm-containing semen into the female's vagina.
Some male mammals are ready and willing to do so any season of the year, depending only on the receptivity of the female.
Others, such as deer, are seasosal breeders, becoming sexually active only at certain times of the year.
In fact, during the off-season their testes regress and produce almost no testosterone.

Male sexual behavior is quite varied, although the essential features of intromission (entry of the penis into the female's vagina), pelvic thrusting (rhythmic movement of the hindquarters, causing genital friction), and ejaculation (discharge of semen) are characteristic of all male mammals.
Humans, of course, have invented all kinds of copulatory and noncopulatory sexual behavior.

For example, the pelvic movements leading to ejaculation may be performed by the woman, and sex play can lead to orgasm without intromission.

The sexual behavior of rats has been studied more than that of any other laboratory animal.
When a male rat encounters a receptive female, he will spend some time nuzzling her and sniffing and licking her genitals, mounther, and engage in pelvic thrusting.
He will mount her several times, achieving intromission on most of the mountings.
After eight to fifteen intromissions approximately 1 minute apart (each lasting only about one-quarter of a second), the male will ejaculate.
At the time of ejaculation he shows a deep pelvic thrust and arches backward.
The copulatory behavior of a mouse is similar and even more dramatic.
During the final intromission the male takes all four feet off the floor, climbing completely on top of the female.
When he ejaculates, he quivers and falls sideways to the ground.
(Sometimes, the female falls with him).

The male rat (along with many other male mammals) is most responsive to females who are in estrus ("in heat").

Males will ignore a female whose ovaries have been removed, but an injection of estradiol will restore her sex appeal (and also change her behavior toward the male).
The stimuli that arouse a male rat's sexual interest include her odor and her behavior.
In some species visible changes, such as the swollen sex skin in the genital region of a female monkey, also affect sex appeal.

After ejaculating, the male refrains from sexual activity for a period of time (minutes, in the rat).
Most mammals will return to copulate again and again, showing a longer pause, called a refractory period , after each ejaculation.
(The term comes from the Latin refringere , "to break off").
An interesting phenomenon occurs in some mammals.
If a male, after finally becoming "exhausted" by repeated copulation with the same female, is presented with a new female, he begins to respond quickly-often as fast as he did in his initial contact with the first female.
Successive introductions of new females can keep up his performance for prolonged periods of time.
The fact that some males show a renewal of interest in sexual behavior with a new female and a good memory for females already copulated with are undoubtedly useful for species in which a single male inseminates all the members of his harem.
Other mammalian species with approximately equal numbers of reproductively active males and females are less likely to act this way.

This phenomenon I have just described, also seen in roosters, is usually called the Coolidge effect .
The following story is reputed to be true, but I cannot vouch for that fact.
(If it is not true, it ought to be).
The late former US president Calvin Coolidge and his wife were touring a farm, when Mrs Coolidge asked the farmer whether the continuous and vigorous sexual activity among the flock of hens was the work of just one rooster.
The reply was yes.
"You might point that out to Mr Coolidge," she said.
The president then asked the farmer whether a different hen was involved each time.
The answer, again, was yes.
"You might point that out to Mrs Coolidge," he said.

Sexual behavior of male rodents depends on testosterone, a fact that has long been recognized (Bermant and Davidson, 1974).
If a male rat is castrated (that is, if his testes are removed), his sexual activity eventually ceases.
However, the behavior can be reinstated by injections of testosterone.
I will describe the neural basis of this activational effect later in this chapter.

The refractory period that occurs after an ejaculation may be produced, at least in part, by prolactin , a hormone normally associated with females.
(Prolactin stimulates milk production).
First, prolactin is released by male rats after ejaculation.
Oaknin, Rodriguez del Castillo, Guerra, Battaner, and Mas (1989) decapitated male rats after they had participated in various aspects of copulatory behavior and analyzed the level of several hormones in their blood.
Immediately after ejaculation their blood level of prolactin rose sharply, to almost four times the baseline level.
Second, prolactin has an inhibitory effect on male sexual behavior.
For example, Kalra, Simpkins, Luttge, and Kalra (1983) found that the transplantation of a prolactin-secreting tumor into male rats suppressed their sexual behavior.
In addition, most men with an abnormally high level of prolactin in their blood show sexual dysfunctions (Perryman and Thorner, 1981).
Possibly, then, prolactin is secreted during ejaculation and inhibits further sexual activity during the refractory period.

Female Sexual Behavior 

The mammalian female is generally described as being the passive participant in copulation.
It is true that in many species the female's role during mounting and intromission is merely to assume a posture that exposes her genitals to the male.
This behavior is called the lordosis response (from the Greek lordos , meaning "bent backward").
The female will also move her tail away (if she has one) and stand rigidly enough to support the weight of the male.

The behavior of a female laboratory animal in initiating copulation is often very active, however.
Certainly, if copulation with a nonestrous rodent is attempted, she will either actively flee or rebuff the male.
But when she is in a receptive state, she will often approach the male, nuzzle him, sniff his genitals, and show behaviors characteristic of her species.
For example, a female rat will exhibit quick, short, hopping movements and rapid ear wiggling, which male rats find irresistible (McClintock and Adler, 1978).

Sexual behavior of female rodents depends on the gonadal hormones present during estrus: estradiol and progesterone.
In rats estradiol increases about 40 hours before the female becomes receptive; and just before receptivity occurs, the corpus luteum begins secreting large quantities of progesterone (Feder, 1981).
Although sexual receptivity can be produced in ovariectomized rodents by administering large doses of estradiol alone, the most effective treatment duplicates the normal sequence of hormones: a small amount of estradiol, followed by progesterone.
Progesterone alone is ineffective; thus, the estradiol "primes" its effectiveness .
Priming with estradiol takes about 16-24 hours, after which an injection of progesterone produces receptive behaviors within an hour (Lisk, 1978).
The neural mechanisms that are responsible for these effects will be described later in this chapter.

Organizational Effects of Androgens on Behavior 

Masculinization and Defeminization 

The dictum "Nature's impulse is to create a female" applies to sexual behavior as well as to sex organs.
That is, if a rodent brain is not exposed to androgens during a critical period of development, the animal will engage in female sexual behavior as an adult (if it is given estradiol and progesterone then).

Fortunately for experimenters, this critical time comes shortly after birth for rats and for several other species of rodents, who are born in a rather immature condition.
Thus, if a male rat is castrated immediately after birth, permitted to grow to adulthood, and then given injections of estradiol and progesterone, it will respond to the presence of another male by arching its back and presenting its hindquarters.
It will act as if it were a female (Blaustein and Olster, 1989).

In contrast, if a rodent brain is exposed to androgens during development, two phenomena occur: behavioral defeminization and behavioral masculinization.
Behavioral defeminization refers to the organizational effect of androgens that prevents the animal from displaying female sexual behavior in adulthood.
As we shall see later, this effect is accomplished by suppressing the development of neural circuits controlling female sexual behavior.
For example, if a female rodent is ovariectomized and given an injection of testosterone immediately after birth, she will not respond to a male rat when, as an adult, she is given injections of estradiol and progesterone.
Behavioral masculinization refers to the organizational effect of androgens that enables animals to engage in male sexual behavior in adulthood.
This effect is accomplished by stimulating the development of neural circuits controlling male sexual behavior.
For example, if the female rodent in my previous example is given testosterone in adulthood, rather than estradiol and progester one, she will mount and attempt to copulate with a receptive female.
(See Feder, 1984, for references to specific studies).
(See Figure 10.12 ).

Figure 10.12

Organizational effects of testosterone.

Around the time of birth, testosterone masculinizes and defeminizes rodents' sexual behavior.

The two organizational effects of androgens on the brain-behavioral masculinization and behavioral defeminization-are of course stimulated by testosterone, but they are also, in part, accomplished by intracellular estradiol .
Testosterone can be converted into estradiol by a process called aromatization .
(In chemistry an aromaticcompound is one that contains a particular six-carbon ring).
Aromatization is accomplished by an enzyme called, appropriately, an aromatase .
Many cells of the brain contain aromatase, and when molecules of testosterone enter them, they are converted into estradiol.
The molecules of estradiol travel to the nucleus, bind with estrogen receptors, and trigger physiological changes that affect development.
It appears that defeminization is largely accomplished by the stimulation of estrogen receptors, whereas masculinization is accomplished by the stimulation of both androgen and estrogen receptors.

Masculinization involves both aromatization and the direct effect of testosterone on androgen receptors (McEwen, 1983; Parsons, Rainbow, and McEwen, 1984).
(See Figure 10.13 ).

Figure 10.13

Aromatization.

In some cells the effects of testosterone are carried out by an estrogen.
Testosterone is aromatized into estradiol, which activates estrogen receptors in the nucleus.

Effects of Pheromones 

Hormones transmit messages from one part of the body (the secreting gland) to another (the target tissue).
Another class of chemicals, called pheromones, carries messages from one animal to another.
These chemicals, like hormones, affect reproductive behavior.
Karlson and Luscher (1959) coined the term, from pherein , "to carry," and horman , "to excite".
Pheromones are released by one animal and directly affect the physiology or behavior of another.

Most pheromones are detected by means of olfaction, but some are ingested or absorbed through the skin.

Pheromones can affect reproductive physiology or behavior.
First, let us consider the effects on reproductive physiology.
When groups of female mice are housed together, their estrous cycles slow down and eventually stop.
This phenomenon is known as the Lee-Boot effect (van der Lee and Boot, 1955).
If groups of females are exposed to the odor of a male (or of his urine), they begin cycling again, and their cycles tend to be synchronized.
This phenomenon is known as the Whitten effect (Whitten, 1959).
The Vandenbergh effect (Vandenbergh, Whitsett, and Lombardi, 1975) is the acceleration of the onset of puberty in a female rodent, caused by the odor of a male.

Ingestive Behavior: Drinking 

As the French physiologist Claude Bernard (1813-1878) said, "The constancy of the internal milieu is a necessary condition for a free life".
This famous quote succinctly says what organisms must do to be able to exist in environments hostile to the living cells that compose them (that is, to live a "free life"):
They must regulate the nature of the internal fluid that bathes their cells.

The physiological characteristics of the cells that constitute our bodies evolved long ago, when these cells floated freely in the ocean.
In essence, what the evolutionary process has accomplished is the ability to make our own seawater to surround our cells, to add to this seawater the oxygen and nutrients that our cells need, and to remove from it waste products that would otherwise poison them.
To perform these functions, we have digestive, respiratory, circulatory, and excretory systems.
We also have the behaviors necessary for finding and ingesting food and water.

Regulation of the fluid that bathes our cells is part of a process called homeostasis ("similar standing").
This chapter discusses the means by which we mammals achieve homeostatic control of the vital characteristics of our extracellular fluid through our ingestive behavior : intake of food, water, and minerals such as sodium.
First, we will examine the general nature of regulatory mechanisms; then we will consider our drinking and eating behavior.

THE NATURE OF PHYSIOLOGICAL REGULATORY MECHANISMS 

A physiological regulatory mechanism is one that maintains the constancy of some internal characteristic of the organism in the face of external variability -for example, maintenance of a constant body temperature despite changes in the ambient temperature.
A regulatory mechanism contains four essential features: the system variable (the characteristic to be regulated), a set point (the optimal value of the system variable), a detector that monitors the value of the system variable, and a correctional mechanism that restores the system variable to the set point.

An example of a regulatory system is a room whose temperature is regulated by a thermostatically controlled heater.
The system variable is the air temperature of the room, and the detector for this variable is a thermostat.
This device can be adjusted so that contacts of a switch will be closed when the temperature falls below a preset value (the set point).

Closure of the contacts turns on the correctional mechanism-the coils of the heater.
(See Figure 12.1 ).

If the room cools below the set point of the thermostat, the thermostat turns the heater on, which warms the room.

The rise in room temperature causes the thermostat to turn the heater off.
Because the activity of the correctional mechanism (heat production) feeds back to the thermostat and causes it to turn the heater off, this process is called negative feedback .

Negative feedback is an essential characteristic of all regulator systems.

This chapter and Chapter 13 consider regulatory systems that involve ingestive behaviors: drinking and eating.

These behaviors are correctional mechanisms that replenish the body's depleted stores of water or nutrients.
Because of the delay between ingestion and replenishment of the depleted stores, ingestive behaviors are controlled by satiety mechanisms as well as by detectors that monitor the system variables.

Satiety mechanisms are required because of the physiology of our digestive system.
For example, suppose you exercise in a hot, dry environment and lose body water.

The loss of water causes internal detectors to initiate the correctional mechanism- drinking.
You quickly drink a glass or two of water and then stop.
What stops your ingestive behavior?
The water is still in your digestive system, not yet in the fluid surrounding your cells, where it is needed.
Therefore, although drinking was initiated by detectors that measure your body's need for water, it was stopped by other means .
There must be a satiety mechanism that says, in effect, "Stop-this water, when absorbed by the digestive system into the blood, will eventually replenish the body need".
Satiety mechanisms monitor the activity of the correctional mechanism (in this case, drinking), not the system variables themselves.
When a sufficient amount of drinking occurs, the satiety mechanisms stop further drinking in anticipation of the replenishment that will occur later. 
(See Figure 12.2 ).

SOME FACTS ABOUT FLUID BALANCE 

Before you can understand the physiological control of drinking, you must know something about the fluid compartments of the body and their relations with each other.
And to understand these facts, you must also know something about the functions of the kidney.

The Fluid Compartments of the Body 

The body contains four major fluid compartments: one compartment of intracellular fluid and three compartments of extracellular fluid.
Approximately two-thirds of the body' s water is contained in the intracellular fluid -the fluid portion of the cytoplasm of cells.
The rest is extracellularfluid , which includes the intravascular fluid (the blood plasma), the cerebrospinal fluid, and the interstitial fluid .
Interstitial means "standing between"; indeed, the interstitial fluid stands between our cells-it is the "seawater" that bathes them.

For the purposes of this chapter I will ignore the cerebrospinal fluid and concentrate on the other three compartments. 
(See Figure 12.3 ).

The fluid compartments are coupled to each other and are separated by semipermeable barriers, which permit the passage of some substances but not others.
The walls of the capillaries separate the intravascular fluid (blood plasma) from the interstitial fluid, and the cell membranes separate the interstitial fluid from the intracellular fluid.
Therefore, if one compartment loses water and its osmotic pressure consequently increases, water is drawn from the other compartments by osmosis.

Figure 12.2

An outline of the system that controls drinking.

Two of the fluid compartments of the body must be kept within precise limits-the intracellular fluid and the intravascular fluid.
The intracellular fluid is controlled by the concentration of solutes in the interstitial fluid.
( Solutes are the solid substances dissolved in a solution).
Normally, the interstitial fluid is isotonic (from isos , "same," and tonos , "tension") with the intracellular fluid.
That is, the concentration of solutes in the cells and in the interstitial fluid that bathes them is balanced, so that water does not tend to move into or out of the cells.
If the interstitial fluid loses water (becomes more concentrated, or hypertonic ), water will then move out of the cells, through osmosis.
On the other hand, if the interstitial fluid gains water (becomes more dilute, or hypotonic ), water will move into the cells.

Either condition endangers cells; a loss of water deprives them of the ability to perform many chemical reactions, and a gain of water can cause their membrane to rupture.
Thus, the concentration of the interstitial fluid must be closely regulated.

Figure 12.3

The relative size of the body's fluid compartments. 

The volume of the blood plasma must be closely regulated because of the mechanics of the operation of the heart .

If the blood volume falls too low, the heart can no longer pump the blood effectively; if the volume is not restored, heart failure will result.
This condition is called hypovolemia , literally "low volume of the blood" ( -emia comes from the Greek haima , "blood").
The vascular system of the body can make some adjustments for loss of blood volume by contracting the muscles in smaller veins and arteries, thereby presenting a smaller space for the blood to fill, but this correctional mechanism has definite limits.

The volume of the interstitial fluid need not be regulated closely.
The most important reason is that when the volumes of the intracellular and intravascular fluid compartments are kept within normal limits, the volume of the extracellular fluid will automatically stay within its normal limits.
Only in certain pathological conditions-such as capillary damage, heart failure, or a very low level of protein in the blood-will the volume of the interstitial fluid become abnormally high.
(There is no way for it to become abnormally low without the other fluid compartments becoming abnormal).
However, although the volume of the interstitial fluid is normally not a matter of concern, its tonicity (solute concentration) must be closely regulated, because this variable is what determines whether water flows into cells or out of them.

As we shall see, the intracellular fluid and the blood volume are monitored by two different sets of receptors.

A single set of receptors would not work, because it is possible for one of these fluid compartments to be changed without affecting the other.
For example, a loss of blood (obviously) reduces the volume of the intravascular fluid, but it has no effect on the volume of the intracellular fluid.
On the other hand, a salty meal will increase the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid and draw water out of the cells.
These cells will remain dehydrated even after the kidney has gotten rid of the excess sodium (and a quantity of water to flush it away) and restored the blood volume back to normal.
Thus, the body needs a set of receptors measuring blood volume and another measuring cell volume.

Just as there are two sets of receptors, there are two sets of correctional mechanisms.
One set involves the ingestion and excretion of water, and the other involves the ingestion and excretion of sodium.
Obviously, the excretions of water and sodium are accomplished by the kidney, and the ingestion of these substances is accomplished by the behavior of eating salt (or foods containing salt) and drinking water.

Most of the time, we drink more water than our body needs, and the excess is excreted by the kidneys.

Similarly, we ingest more sodium than we need, and the kidneys get rid of the surplus.
Thus, if we want to understand the means of regulating our water and sodium balance, we must understand what the kidneys do and how they are controlled.

The Kidneys 

A human kidney consists of approximately a million functional units called nephrons .
Each nephron extracts fluid from the blood and carries it, through collecting ducts, to the ureter .
The ureter, in turn, connects the kidney to the urinary bladder, where urine is stored until it can be released at a convenient time.
(This behavior, which physiologists politely refer to as micturition , from the Latin word for "urinate," has absolutely nothing to do with regulation.

Once the urine is in the bladder, it is out of the body as far as the three fluid compartments are concerned).
(See Figure 12.4 ).

The kidneys control the amount of water and sodium that the body excretes, which controls both the volume and the concentration (tonicity) of the extracellular fluid.
If we drink a large amount of water and must get rid of the excess, our kidneys pass a large quantity of urine to the bladder.
Similarly, if we eat salty food and must get rid of the excess sodium, our kidneys extract the sodium from our blood and pass it on to the bladder.
However, if the organism has lost water through evaporation, the kidneys conserve water, producing a small quantity of urine.
In addition, if the body becomes deficient in sodium, the kidneys will begin to excrete a very small amount in the urine.

Figure 12.4

Anatomy of the kidney and an individual nephron (From Orians, G H, The Study of Life, Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1973) 

The amounts of sodium and water that the kidneys excrete are controlled by two hormones: aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone.
Sodium excretion is controlled by aldosterone , a steroid hormone secreted by the adrenal cortex.
High levels of aldosterone cause the kidneys to retain sodium in the body-to pass very little sodium on to the bladder.
Thus, if the body contains too much sodium, the level of aldosterone secretion falls and sodium is excreted in the urine .
If too little salt is present, a high aldosterone level causes it to be conserved. 
(See Figure 12.5 ).

The excretion of water by the kidneys is controlled by a hormone called vasopressin .
The name of this hormone is unfortunate, because it does not describe its primary function, which is to instruct the kidneys how much water to retain.
High levels of vasopressin will cause the kidneys to retain as much water as possible, only excreting as much as is needed to rid the body of the waste products of metabolism.
The term vasopressin refers to its ability under certain circumstances to cause blood vessels to contract ( vas means "vessel" in Latin).
A better term is antidiuretic hormone . 
( Diuresis comes from the Greek dia , "through," and ouron , "urine"; thus, anti diuretic hormone reduces the production of urine).
Nevertheless, vasopressin is the name that most physiologists use.

Vasopressin is a peptide hormone secreted by the posterior pituitary gland.
It is produced in the cell bodies of neurons located in two nuclei of the hypothalamus: the supraoptic nucleus and the paraventricular nucleus .
The hormone is stored in vesicles and travels through axons to the posterior pituitary gland, where it collects in the terminal buttons.
When the neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei become active, their terminal buttons release vasopressin, which enters the blood supply.
Thus, the production, storage, and release of vasopressin is exactly like that of any peptide transmitter substance, except that it affects receptors in another part of the body, not in a membrane across a synaptic cleft.

If we drink more water than our body needs, the posterior pituitary gland stops secreting vasopressin, and the kidneys excrete the excess water.
If we become dehydrated, the posterior pituitary gland increases vasopressin secretion, and the kidneys excrete a minimum amount of water.
(See Figure 12.5 ).

Figure 12.5

Hormonal control of the kidney.

Aldosterone, secreted bx the cortex of the adrenal gland, causes sodium retention by the kidney.

Vasopressin, secreted by the posterior pituitary gland, causes water retention.

So far, I have been talking only about system variables and correctional mechanisms.
What about detectors?
It turns out that some of the same detectors that control the secretion of aldosterone and vasopressin (and thus control the excretion of sodium and water by the kidneys) also control the intake of water and salt.
Thus, I will discuss them in the next section.

INTERIM SUMMARY 

A regulatory system contains four features: a system variable (the variable that is regulated), a set point (the optimal value of the system variable), a detector to measure the system variable, and a correctional mechanism to change it.
Physiological regulatory systems, such as control of body fluids and nutrients, require a satiety mechanism to anticipate the effects of the correctional mechanism, because the changes brought about by eating and drinking occur only after a considerable period of time.

The body contains three major fluid compartments: the intracellular fluid, the interstitial fluid, and the intravascular fluid.
Sodium and water can easily pass between the intravascular fluid and the interstitial fluid, but sodium cannot penetrate the cell membrane.
The solute concentration of the interstitial fluid must be closely regulated.
If it becomes hypertonic, cells lose water; if it becomes hypotonic, they gain water.
The volume of the intravascular fluid (blood plasma) must also be kept within bounds.

The kidneys regulate the excretion of water and sodium; in the process of excreting water, waste products are carried away by the urine.
Aldosterone, a steroid hormone released by the adrenal cortex, causes sodium retention.

Vasopressin, a peptide hormone produced by the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei and released by the posterior pituitary gland, causes water retention.

DRINKING AND SALT APPETITE 

As we just saw, in order for our bodies to function properly, the volume of two fluid compartments-intracellular and intravascular -must be regulated.
Most of the time, we ingest more water and sodium than we need, and the kidneys excrete the excess.

However, if the levels of water or sodium fall too low, correctional mechanisms- drinking of water or ingestion of sodium-are activated.
Everyone is familiar with the sensation of thirst, which occurs when we need to ingest water.
However, a salt appetite is much more rare, because it is difficult for people not to get enough sodium in their diet, even if they do not put extra salt on their food.
Nevertheless, the mechanisms to increase sodium intake exist, even though they are seldom called upon in members of our species.

Because loss of water from either the intracellular or intravascular fluid compartments stimulates drinking, researchers have adopted the terms osmometric thirst and volumetric thirst to describe them.
The term volumetric is clear-it refers to the metering (measuring) of the volume of the blood plasma.
The term osmometric requires more explanation, which I will provide in the next section.
The term thirst means different things in different circumstances.
Its original definition referred to a sensation that people say they have when they are dehydrated.
Here I use it in a descriptive sense.
Because we do not know how experimental animals feel, thirst simply means a tendency to seek water and to ingest it.

Osmometric Thirst 

Osmometric thirst occurs when the tonicity (solute concentration) of the interstitial fluid increases.
This event draws water out of the cells, and they shrink in volume.
The term osmometric refers to the fact that the detectors are actually responding to (metering) differences in concentration of the intracellular fluid and the interstitial fluid that surrounds them.

The existence of neurons that respond to changes in the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid was first hypothesized by Verney (1947), who called them osmoreceptors .
Verney found that an infusion of hypertonic sodium chloride into a dog's carotid artery would stimulate the secretion of vasopressin and thus cause the kidneys to decrease their excretion of water.
Figure 12.6 shows how the injection caused an almost immediate decrease in the production of urine.
(See Figure 12.6 ).

Verney hypothesized that osmoreceptors were neurons whose firing rate was affected by their level of hydration.

That is, if the interstitial fluid surrounding them became more concentrated, they would lose water through osmosis.
The shrinkage would cause them to alter their firing rate, which would send signals to the neurons that control the rate of vasopressin secretion.
(See Figure 12.7 ).
As we shall see, more recent studies have confirmed that osmoreceptors do exist and that they can initiate drinking as well as vasopressin secretion.

Figure 12.6

Effects of an injection of hypertonic saline solution into a dog's carotid artery.

The solution removed water from cells in the brain and caused the posterior pituitary gland to secrete vasopressin.
The hormone caused water to be retained by the kidneys, reducing the flow of urine. 
(From Verney, EG.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B., 1947,135, 25-106).

Figure 12.7

A hypothetical explanation of the workings of an osmoreceptor. 

Before I discuss the evidence concerning the existence and location of osmoreceptors, I want to say more about the conditions that cause osmotic thirst.
Our bodies lose water continuously, primarily through evaporation.
Each breath exposes the moist inner surfaces of the respiratory system to the air; thus, each breath causes the loss of a small amount of water.
In addition, our skin is not completely waterproof; some water finds its way through the lavers of the skin and evaporates from the surface.
The moisture lost through evaporation is, of course, pure distilled water.
(Sweating loses water, too; but because it loses salt along with the water, it produces a sodium need as well).
When we lose water through evaporation, we lose it from all fluid compartments, intracellular, interstitial, and intravascular.
Thus, normal dehydration produces both osmometric and volumetric thirst.

Figure 12.8 illustrates how the loss of water through evaporation depletes both the intracellular and intravascular fluid compartments.
For the sake of simplicity, only a few cells are shown, and the volume of the interstitial fluid is greatly exaggerated.
Water is lost directly from the interstitial fluid, which becomes slightly more concentrated than either the intracellular or the intravascular fluid.
Thus, water is drawn from both the cells and the blood plasma.
When enough water is lost from the cells, the secretion of vasopressin will be stimulated, and urine production will diminish.

Eventually, the loss of water from the cells and the blood plasma will be great enough that both osmometric and volumetric thirst will be produced.
(See Figure 12.8 ).

If evaporation were the only was that the distribution of water in the three fluid compartments could be disturbed, then we would not need two kinds of detectors to stimulate thirst.
However, it is possible to incur a loss of intracellular fluid without losing intravascular fluid.
(And as we shall see in the next section, the opposite condition is possible, too).

Figure 12.8

The loss of water through evaporation. 

The most common way to incur a separate intracellular fluid loss is to eat a salty meal.
The salt is absorbed from the digestive system into the blood plasma; hence the blood plasma becomes hypertonic.
This condition draws water from the interstitial fluid, which makes this compartment become hypertonic, too, and thus causes water to leave the cells.
As the blood plasma increases in volume, the kidneys begin excreting large amounts of both sodium and water.
Eventually, the excess sodium is excreted, along with the water that was taken from the interstitial and intracellular fluid.
The net result is a loss of water from the cells.
At no time did the volume of the blood plasma fall;
in fact, it was temporarily higher than normal, which is what triggered the excretion of sodium and water by the kidneys.
(The mechanism responsible for the increased excretion will be discussed in the section on volumetric thirst).

As we saw earlier, Verney hypothesized that he loss of water by the cells of the body is the stimulus that produces osmometric thirst.
Fitzsimons (1972) obtained evidence that supports Verney's hypothesis by demonstrating that the stimulus for osmometric thirst is not simply a change in the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid but the effect that these changes have on the water content of the cells.

Fitzsimons removed the kidneys of a group of rats to prevent the kidneys from eliminating water or any of the substances he administered to the animals.
Next, he injected the animals with hypertonic solutions of substances that can enter cells (such as glucose and urea) or substances that cannot (such as sodium chloride, sodium sulfate, and sucrose-table sugar).
All of the substances that he injected would increase the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid.
However, only the substances that cannot enter cells would draw water from them.
For example, an increased concentration of urea in the interstitial fluid has no effect on cells because the urea freely diffuses into them, and a concentration gradient is not set up.

In fact, the only animals that drank excessively were those that received substances that could not enter the cells and hence drew water from them; thus, cell dehydration is the stimulus for osmometric thirst.

Fitzsimons found that an injection of urea (but not glucose or other substances that can enter cells) produced a small amount of drinking.
The reason for this effect is that urea passes slowly through the blood-brain barrier.
Therefore, an injection of urea produces a slight, and temporary, dehydration of the brain.
The fact that brain dehydration produces drinking suggested that the osmoreceptors that produce thirst are located there.

Fitzsimons was not the first to obtain evidence that osmoreceptors were located in the brain.
Andersson (1953) found that injections of hypertonic saline solution into the rostrolateral hypothalamus produced drinking but not vasopressin release, whereas injections into caudal hypothalamic regions stimulated vasopressin secretion but not thirst.
Thus, different sets of receptors appear to mediate drinking and vasopressin release in response to hypertonicity.

An extensive mapping study by Peck and Blass (1975) suggested that the osmoreceptors that stimulate thirst in rats are located in the preoptic area and the anterior hypothalamus.
They found that injections of hypertonic sucrose there produced drinking.
(See Figure 12.9 ).
In addition, Blass and Epstein (1971) found that when a rat was made thirsty by giving it a subcutaneous injection of hypertonic saline, drinking could be inhibited by injecting water into the preoptic area.
Presumably, the water turned off the signal for thirst at the detectors.
(This manipulation was similar to what would happen if we heated the thermostat in a cold room; we would "fool" the thermostat and cause it to turn off the furnace).

Figure 12.9

The lateral preoptic area and the lateral hypothalamus.

Injection of hypertonic sucrose in this region produces drinking, presumably by stimulating osmoreceptors located there. 
(Adapted from Paxinos, G., and Watson; C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates.
Sydney: Academic Press, 1982.
Redrawn with permission).

Many electrophysiological studies have found evidence of neurons whose firing rate is altered by infusions of hypertonic solutions.
Arnauld, Dufy, and Vincent (1975) and Blank and Wayner (1975) found that water deprivation or systemic injections of hypertonic saline produce responses of neurons in the preoptic area.
Subsequently, Silva and Boulant (1984) confirmed that the preoptic area contained osmoreceptors and not simply neurons that receive input from osmoreceptors located elsewhere.
The investigators prepared a slice of live brain tissue from the preoptic area and recorded the activity of single neurons in the slice.
When the solution that bathed the tissue was made hypertonic by the addition of solutes, the firing rate of the neurons changed.

There is still considerable uncertainty about the location of the osmoreceptors that stimulate vasopressin secretion.
Most investigators believe that these osmoreceptors are not the ones that stimulate drinking.

Some evidence suggests that the region immediately rostral to the anteroventral tip of the third ventricle contains these receptors, and other evidence suggests that they are located in the circumventricular organs or perhaps even in the supraoptic nucleus, which contains most of the neurons that synthesize vasopressin (Baylis and Thompson, 1988).
(I will describe the circumventricular organs and the region around the anteroventral third ventricle in the section that discusses brain mechanisms).

Osmoreceptors outside the brain may also control vasopressin release.
For example, when a thirsty animal drinks, vasopressin secretion is inhibited even before substantial amounts of water leave the digestive system (Nicoladis, 1969).
Thus, these receptors perform an anticipatory role, similar to that of satiety, which was discussed earlier in this chapter.

Where could these receptors be?
One possibility is that they are on the tongue, which would be in a position to detect the presence of water in the mouth.
Another possibility is that they are in the throat and are activated by the passage of water or by the action of the throat muscles responsible for swallowing.
Alternatively they could be located in the walls of the stomach or in the small intestine, which receives water from the stomach soon after it is swallowed.
Finally, they could be in the liver.

Before I settle this mystery, I should describe two important parts of the body to you: the small intestine and the liver.
The first part of the small intestine, which receives food and water from the stomach, is called the duodenum .
The original Greek name for this part of the gut was dodekadaktulon , or "twelve fingers long." In fact, the duodenum is twelve finger widths long.
The walls of the duodenum contain receptors, some of which may communicate with the brain through the nerves that serve the intestine.
The liver is the first organ to receive substances from the digestive system.
It receives them through the hepatic portal system , a special vascular system.
Water and nutrients enter the blood supply through capillaries located in the small intestine.
These capillaries collect into larger and larger veins and finally into the hepatic portal vein , which travels to the liver and branches into capillaries again.
(See Figure 12.10 ).

And now, the answer to the mystery.
It appears that the immediate inhibitory effect of drinking on vasopressin secretion is caused by the act of drinking itself.
The receptors that produce this effect do not appear to be on the tongue; in a study with human subjects Geelen et al (1984) found that gargling water did not affect vasopressin secretion.
However, the act of drinking a hypertonic saline solution did, at least for a few minutes.
These results suggest that receptors in the throat (or perhaps the neurons in the brain that control the act of swallowing) detect the fact that water has been swallowed and inhibit the neurons of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei that are responsible for vasopressin secretion.
The fact that drinking a hypertonic saline solution temporarily inhibited the secretion of vasopressin suggests that the anticipatory mechanism has only short-term effects; presumably, long-term inhibition must be produced by the presence of water in the digestive system.

The source of this long-term inhibition may be the liver.

Haeberich (1968) found that the infusion of water or a hypertonic solution of sodium chloride into the hepatic portal vein, which leads to the liver, produced increases or decreases in urine production.
Later, Chwalbinski-Moneta (1979)replicated these results, making direct measurements of vasopressin in the blood.

Single-unit recording studies by Niijima (1969) had already shown that the liver contains osmoreceptive neurons; presumably these neurons, which are connected to the brain through the vagus nerve, inform the brain about the solute concentration of the blood plasma being received from the digestive system.
The connection between the vagus nerve and the neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus appears to follow a pathway similar to that followed by the gustatory system (Rogers and Novin, 1983).

Figure 12.10

The hepatic portal blood supply.

The liver receives water, minerals, and nutrients from the digestive system through this system.

Volumetric Thirst 

Volumetric thirst occurs when the volume of the blood plasma-the intravascular volume- decreases.
As we saw earlier, when we lose water through evaporation, we lose it from all three fluid compartments, intracellular, interstitial, and intravascular.
Thus, evaporation produces both volumetric thirst and osmometric thirst.
If evaporation were the only way that our body lost fluids, we would not need to have drinking mechanisms controlled by detectors that monitor blood volume.
However, it is possible to incur a loss in intravascular volume without affecting the interstitial compartment.
Loss of blood, vomiting, and diarrhea all cause hypovolemia without depleting the intracellular fluid.

Loss of blood is the most obvious cause of pure volumetric thirst.
From the earliest recorded history, reports of battles note that the wounded survivors called out for water.
(More prosaically, vomiting or diarrhea rids the body of isotonic fluid and hence lowers the volume of the intravascular fluid).
Thus, volumetric thirst provides a second line of defense against a loss of water should damage occur to the osmometric system, and it provides the means for the loss of isotonic fluid to instigate drinking.
In addition, because hypovolemia involves a loss of sodium as well as water (that is, the sodium that was contained in the isotonic fluid that was lost), volumetric thirst leads to a salt appetite.

The easiest way to produce hypovolemia in experimental animals such as rats would be to remove some of their blood.
A less drastic procedure is to inject a colloid into the animal's abdominal cavity or under the loose skin of the back (Fitzsimons, 1961).

Colloids are gluelike substances (from the Greek kolla , "glue") made of large molecules that cannot cross cell membranes.
Thus, they stay in the abdominal cavity or in the space under the skin.
Because the solution of molecules is hypertonic, it draws extracellular fluid out of tissue.
The fluid that leaves the blood plasma is isotonic; as water molecules move down the concentration gradient produced by the colloid, they draw sodium chloride with them.
Initially, the water comes from the interstitial fluid; but as the volume of this fluid space decreases, the pressure of the blood causes fluid from the blood plasma to begin to fill the vacant space.
Fluid does not leave the cells, because the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid remains stable.
Within an hour the posterior pituitary gland begins to release vasopressin, and urine volume drops.
At about the same time the animal begins to drink, and it continues to do so until most of the volume of fluid stolen from the extracellular fluid has been replaced.

Let us look at a specific experiment that produced volumetric thirst.
Fitzsimons (1961) injected a colloid called polyethylene glycol into the abdominal cavity of rats and later drained the fluid that accumulated, ridding the body of the colloid along with the water and sodium chloride it had drawn from the extracellular fluid.
The loss of water caused a considerable thirst; the animals drank water copiously.

One or two days later, he presented the rats with both water and a hypertonic 1.8 percent saline solution, which rats normally refuse to drink.
This time, the rats avidly consumed the saline solution.
Why did they do so?
The procedure had removed both water and salt, so they needed both substances to restore their fluid compartments to normal.
Thus, the loss of salt induced a strong salt appetite .

What detectors are responsible for initiating volumetric thirst and a salt appetite? 
In fact, there are at least two sets of receptors that accomplish this dual function: one in the kidneys, and one in the heart and large blood vessels.

The Role of Angiotensin 

The kidneys contain cells that are able to detect decreases in flow of blood to the kidneys.
The primary cause of a reduced flow of blood is a loss of blood volume; thus, these cells detect the presence of hypovolemia.
When the flow of blood to the kidneys decreases, these cells secrete an enzyme called renin .
Renin enters the blood, where it catalyzes the conversion of a protein called angiotensinogen into a hormone called angiotensin .
(In fact, there are two forms of angiotensin.
Angiotensinogen becomes angiotensin I, which is quickly converted by an enzyme to angiotensin II.
The active form is angiotensin II, which I shall abbreviate as AII).

Angiotensin II has several physiological effects: It stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, it stimulates the posterior pituitary gland to secrete vasopressin, and it increases blood pressure by causing the muscles in the small arteries to contract.
(Recall that the presence of aldosterone inhibits the kidneys from excreting sodium, and the presence of vasopressin inhibits them from excreting water).
In addition, it has two behavioral effects: It initiates both drinking and a salt appetite.
Therefore, a reduction in the flow of blood to the kidneys causes water and sodium to be retained by the body, helps compensate for their loss by reducing the size of the blood vessels, and encourages the animal to find and ingest both water and salt.
(See Figure 12.11 ).

Angiotensin and Food-Related Drinking 

Although research on the physiology of drinking has generally focused on drinking caused by need (that is, by hypovolemia or by cellular dehydration), most drinking occurs in anticipation of actual need, during meals (de Castro, 1988; Kraly, 1990).
For two reasons, eating produces a need for water.
First, eating causes water to be diverted from the rest of the body into the stomach and small intestine, where it is needed for the digestive process (Lepkovsky et al, 1957).

Second, once food is absorbed (especially salty food or food rich in amino acids), it increases the solute concentration of the blood plasma and thus induces an osmometric thirst.
In fact, animals do not wait until they need the water; they drink it with their meal.

Fitzsimons and Le Magnen (1969) found that when rats were switched from a highcarbohydrate diet to a high-protein diet, they increased their water intake.
At first, they drank most of the water after the meal, when the osmotic demands were being felt.
However, within a few days the animals began drinking more water with the meals.
They apparently learned the association of the new diet with subsequent thirst and drank in anticipation of that thirst.

Figure 12.11

Detection of hypovolemia by the kidney and the reninangiotensin system. 

According to research by Kraly and his colleagues, food-related drinking appears to involve angiotensin.
The movement of water into the digestive system during and after a meal causes hypovolemia (Nose, Morita, Yawata, and Norimoto, 1986).
As we just saw, hypovolemia stimulates the kidneys to secrete renin, which results in increased blood levels of angiotensin II.
Kraly and Corneilson (1990) found that when they prevented the synthesis of angiotensin II with captopril (a drug that blocks the enzyme responsible for converting angiotensin I to angiotensin II), rats drank less water with their meals.

Food-related drinking also involves histamine, a compound that serves as a transmitter substance in the brain and as a hormone-like messenger in the rest of the body.
When an animal eats, cells in the stomach release histamine.

If, prior to eating a meal, a rat is given drugs that block histamine receptors, the animal will drink much less water with that meal (Kraly and Specht, 1984).
In addition, an injection of histamine will itself cause drinking (Kraly, 1983).
Kraly and Corneilson (1990) suggest that thirst provoked by histamine may involve angiotensin.
They note that the secretion of renin is controlled by histamine receptors on cells in the kidney (Radke et al, 1986), and they found that blocking the synthesis of angiotensin II with captopril abolished the stimulating effect of histamine on drinking.
Perhaps, then, the entry of food into the stomach causes the release of histamine, which stimulates the secretion of renin by the kidneys.
The renin catalyzes the synthesis of angiotensin, which activates drinking mechanisms in the brain.

Atrial Baroreceptors 

The second set of receptors for volumetric thirst lies within the heart.
Physiologists had long known that the atria of the heart (the parts that receive blood from the veins) contain sensory neurons that detect stretch .
The atria are passively filled with blood being returned from the body by the veins.
The more blood that is present, the fuller the atria become just before each contraction of the heart.
Thus, when the volume of the blood plasma falls, the stretch receptors within the atria will detect the change.
These receptors occupy the best possible location to detect the presence of hypovolemia.

Fitzsimons and Moore-Gillon (1980) showed that information from these receptors can stimulate thirst.

They operated on dogs and placed a small balloon in the inferior vena cava, the vein that brings blood from most of the body (excluding the head and arms) to the heart .

When the balloon was inflated, it reduced the flow of blood to the heart and thus lowered the amount of blood that entered the right atrium.
Within 30 minutes the dogs began to drink.
The effect occurred even when the investigators administered saralasin , a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors; thus, it was not produced by secretion of renin by the kidneys.
In another experiment Moore-Gillon and Fitzsimons (1982) implanted a small balloon in the junction between one of the large veins from the lungs and the left atrium of the heart.
(They removed the part of the lung served by the vein so that inflating the balloon had no effect on the flow of blood into the heart).
Inflation of the balloon directly stimulated stretch receptors in the left atrium-and reduced the amount of water that the animals drank.

Anatomy of memory 

Experiences change us; encounters with our environment alter our behavior, presumably by modifying our nervous system.
Until recently, the search for the neural basis of memory has seemed disappointingly slow.
The brain is complex, and so is learning.
Although the individual changes that occur within the cells of the brain may be relatively simple, the brain consists of many billions of neurons.
Therefore, isolating and identifying the particular changes that are responsible for a particular memory is exceedingly difficult.
Similarly, although the elements of a particular learning task may be simple, its implications for an organism may be complex.
The behavior that the investigator observes and measures may be only one of many that change as a result of an experience.

However, despite the difficulties, the long years of work finally seem to be paying off.
New approaches and new methods -ave evolved from old ones, and real progress has been made in understanding the anatomy and physiology of learning and remembering.

This chapter discusses research on the anatomy of learning; it describes investigations that have attempted to determine which parts of the brain are involved in learning.
Chapter 15 discusses what we have learned about the structural and biochemical changes that occur in the nervous system when learning takes place.

THE NATURE OF MEMORY 

We use the word memory as if it described a tangible object-a note we make to ourselves and put away for future reference.
However, when we say we store memories and later retrieve them, we are speaking metaphorically.
Although it is convenient to describe memories as if they were notes placed in filing cabinets, this is certainly not the way experiences are reflected within the brain.
Experiences are not "stored"; they change the way we perceive, perform, think, and plan.
They do so by physically changing the structure of the nervous system, altering neural circuits that participate in perceiving, performing, thinking, and planning.

As I said in Chapter 2, the primary function of the brain is to move the muscles-to produce useful behaviors.
The primary function of the ability to learn is to develop behaviors that are adapted to an ever-changing environment.
The ability to learn permits us to find food when we are hungry, warmth when we are cold, companions when we are lonely.
It also permits us to avoid objects or situations that might harm us.

However, the fact that the ultimate function of learning is a useful change in behavior does not mean that learning takes place only in the parts of the brain that control movement.
Learning can take at least three basic forms: perceptual learning, stimulus response learning, and motor learning.
More complex forms of learning also exist; for example, we have the ability to remember the relations between large numbers of objects and events, including the many different stimuli (and our responses to them) that constitute particular episodes in our lives.
As we will see, this category of learning has been given many names, and investigators still disagree about its exact characteristics.
For convenience, I will refer to it as relational learning.

Let us look at each of these types of learning.

Perceptual learning is the ability to learn to recognize stimuli that have been seen before and to distinguish them from similar ones.
The primary function of this type of learning is the identification and categorization of objects (including other members of our own species) and situations.
Unless we have learned to recognize something, we cannot learn how we should behave with respect to it-we will not profit from our experiences with it, and profiting from experience is what learning is all about.

Each of our sensory systems is capable of perceptual learning.
We can learn to recognize objects by their visual appearance, the sounds they make, how they feel, or how they smell.
We can recognize people by the shape of their faces, the movements they make when they walk, or the sound of their voices.
When we hear people talk, we can recognize the words they are saying and, perhaps, their emotional state.
As we shall see, perceptual learning appears to be accomplished by changes in the sensory association cortex.
That is, learning to recognize complex visual stimuli involves changes in the visual association cortex, learning to recognize complex auditory stimuli involves changes in the auditory association cortex, and so on. 
(Very simple stimuli, such as changes in brightness, do not require the neocortex; learning that involves these stimuli can be accomplished by subcortical components of the sensory systems).

Stimulus-response learning is the ability to learn to perform a particular behavior when a particular stimulus is present.
The behavior could be an automatic response such as a defensive reflex, or it could be a complicated sequence of movements that was learned previously.
Stimulus-response learning includes two major categories of learning that have been studied by psychologists: classical conditioning and instrumental conditioning .

Classical conditioning is a form of learning in which an unimportant stimulus acquires the properties of an important one.
It involves an association between two stimuli .
A stimulus that previously had little effect on behavior becomes able to evoke a reflexive, species-typical behavior.
For example, we flinch when we see a balloon being overinflated near our face.
The flinch is a species- typical defensive reaction that serves to protect our eyes.
Normally, this reaction occurs when we hear a loud noise, when something rapidly approaches our face, or when our eyes or the skin around them is touched; we do not have to learn to make this response.
We respond this way when we see an overinflated balloon because of our prior experience with bursting balloons.
Sometime in the past, probably when we were children overinflated balloon burst near our face, and the blast of air elicited a defensive flinch.
Through classical conditioning the stimulus that preceded the blast of air-the sight of an overinflated balloon-became an elicitor of flinching.

Figure 14.1

The process of classical conditioning.

The names that have been assigned to the stimuli and responses that constitute classical conditioning are shown in Figure 14.1.
I will use these terms repeatedly in this chapter and in chapter 15, so it is worth your while learning them now.
The blast of air, the original eliciting stimulus, is called the unconditional stimulus (US).
It unconditionally elicits the species-typical response.
The response of flinching is called the unconditional response (UR).
After a person has had a few experiences with bursting balloons, the sight of the inflated balloon-the conditional stimulus (CS)-comes to elicit flinching, which is - ow called the conditional response (CR): The response is conditional on the pairing of the conditional and unconditional stimuli. 
(See Figure 4.1 ).

Classical conditioning occurs when a neutral stimulus is followed by one that automatically elicits a response.
It enables organisms to learn to make species-typical responses under new conditions.
Thus, classical conditioning serves to pre-are an organism for a forthcoming event.
For example, a warning signal can permit the organism to defend itself against harm; stimuli associated with a potential mate can cause it to emit a response that serves as a sexual display; and stimuli associated with food can cause secretion of saliva, ingestive juices, and insulin.
(We saw examples of Classically conditioned responses of the digestive system in Chapter 13).

A particularly important effect of classical conditioning is the establishment of conditioned emotional responses .
After having had pleasant or unpleasant experiences with particular objects, with particular people, or in particular locations, we experience emotional reactions when we Again encounter these objects, people, or places.
For example, if we encounter someone we had an unpleasant argument with, the sight of that person (or the sound of his or her voice) is likely to produce some of the same reactions of the autonomic nervous system that occurred during the argument.
We feel the effects of these responses, and we recognize the presence of an unpleasant emotion.

How does classical conditioning work?
Figure 14.2 shows a simplified neural circuit that could account for this type of learning.
I will use an example that I will discuss in more detail later in this chapter, a defensive eyeblink response of a rabbit.
A small puff of air directed toward the eye can trigger this reflex; thus, a puff of air serves as a US.
There are many potential CSs.

The diagram shows two possible ones, a 1000-Hz tone and a 5000-Hz tone.
For the sake of simplicity, we will pretend that the auditory system contains two neurons, each one responding with action potentials when one of these two tones is detected.
We will also pretend that the somatosensory system contains only one neuron, which responds when the eye receives a puff of air.
Finally, we will pretend that the motor system contains three neurons that control three responses: blinking, ear wiggling, and nose twitching.
In a real nervous system the somatosensory and auditory systems could detect a very large number of different stimuli, and the motor system could control a very large number of different responses.

However, the principles are much easier to understand in a simple diagram.
(See Figure 14.2 ).

Now let us see how the circuit works.
If we present a 1000-Hz tone, we find that the animal makes no reaction, because the synapses connecting the tone-sensitive neuron with the neurons of the motor system are weak.
However, if we present a puff of air to the eye, the eye blinks.

This occurs because the process of evolution has provided a strong synapse between the somatosensory neuron and the motor neuron that causes a blink (synapse P, for "puff").

The synapse is strong because it is useful to close one' s eyelid when one's eye is threatened.
To establish classical conditioning, we first present the 1000Hz tone and then almost immediately follow it with a puff of air.

After we repeat these pairs of stimuli several times, we find that we can dispense with the air puff; the 1000-Hz tone produces the blink all by itself.

Over forty years ago, Hebb proposed a rule that might explain how neurons are changed by experience in a way that would cause changes in behavior (Hebb, 1949).
The Hebb rule says, "When an axon of cell A is near enough to excite cell B or repeatedly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth process or metabolic change takes place in one or both cells such that A's efficiency, as one of the cells firing B, is increased" (p. 62).
How would the Hebb rule apply to our circuit?
If the 1000-Hz tone is presented first, then weak synapse T (for "tone") becomes active.
If the puff is presented immediately afterward, then strong synapse P becomes active and makes the motor neuron fire.
The act of firing then strengthens all synapses with the motor neuron that have just been active .
Of course, this means synapse T.
After several pairings of the stimuli, and several increments of strengthening, synapse T becomes strong enough to cause the motor neuron to fire by itself.
Learning has occurred. 
(See Figure 14.2 ).

Figure 14.2

A simple neural model of classical conditioning.

When the 1000-Hz tone is presented just before the puff of air to the eye, synapse T is strengthened.

When Hebb formulated his rule, he was unable to determine whether it was true or false.
Now, finally, enough progress has been made in laboratory techniques that the strength of individual synapses can be determined, and investigators are studying the physiological bases of learning.
In fact, Chapter 15 is devoted to such studies.

The second major class of stimulus-response learning is instrumental conditioning (also called operant conditioning ).
Whereas classical conditioning involves automatic, species-typical responses, instrumental conditioning involves behaviors that have been learned.
And whereas classical conditioning involves an association between two stimuli, instrumental conditioning involves an association between a response and a stimulus .
Instrumental conditioning is a more flexible and adaptive form of learning.
It permits an organism to adjust its behavior according to the consequences of that behavior.
That is, when a behavior is followed by favorable consequences, the behavior tends to occur more frequently; when it is followed by unfavorable consequences, it tends to occur less frequently.

Collectively, "favorable consequences" are referred to as reinforcing stimuli , and "unfavorable consequences" are referred to as punishing stimuli .
For example, a response that enables a hungry organism to find food will be reinforced, and a response that causes pain will be punished.

Because most physiological investigations of instrumental conditioning have been devoted to reinforcement rather than punishment, I will restrict my discussion to this phenomenon.
Briefly stated, reinforcement causes changes in an animal's nervous system that increase the likelyhood that a particular stimulus will elicit a particular response.
For example, when a hungry rat is put in an operant chamber, it is not very likely press the lever mounted on a wall.
However, if it does press the lever, and if it receives a piece of food immediately afterward, the likelihood of making another response increases.
Put another way, reinforcement causes the sight of the lever to serve as the stimulus that elicits the lever-pressing response.
It is not accurate to say simply that a particular movement becomes more frequent.
If no lever is present, a rat that has learned to press one will not wave its paw around in the air.
The sight of a lever is needed to produce the response.
Thus, the process of reinforcement establishes a connection between neural circuits involved in pereption (the sight of the lever) and those involved in movement (the act of lever pressing).

How might instrumental conditioning work?
Figure 14.3 provides a possible model.
Our rat's visual system contains two neurons.
One fires when the rat sees a lever, and the other fires when it sees a water bottle.
(Again, we will keep things simple.

Besides providing the brain with only a few neurons, we will ignore the role of hunger, which would certainly have an important effect on learning and performance).

The motor system contains three neurons.
The first produces the movements needed to press the lever, the second makes the rat's ears wiggle, and the third makes it stand on its hind legs.
Another neuron is part of a reinforcement system.
This neuron is activated when good things happen.
For example, if the rat is hungry and it receives some food, that is a good thing.
(I will say a little more about the reinforcement system later in this chapter and will discuss it in much more detail in Chapter 16, which deals with reinforcement and addictive behaviors).
(See Figure 14.3 ).

I am sure you see the similarity between Figure 14.3 and Figure 14.2.
Initially, synapse L (for "lever") is too weak to cause the motor neuron to fire .
Thus, the sight of the lever does not make the rat press it.
However, eventually the rat happens to wander over and press the lever. 
(Psychologists have developed special procedures to get rats to perform unlikely behaviors such as lever pressing, but there is no reason to concern ourselves with this issue here).
The lever press causes a piece of food to be delivered to the rat, who quickly eats it.
This "good thing" is detected by the reinforcement system, which makes synapses with all the motor neurons.
When synapse R (for "reinforcement") is active, it causes the strengthening of all synapses that have just fired it if the postsynaptic neuron has also just fired .
In this case it is synapse L on the neuron that produces the lever press that gets strengthened.
Once synapse L is sufficiently strengthened, the sight of the lever elicits the lever press.
(See Figure l4.3 ).

Figure 14.3

A simple neural model of instrumental conditioning. 

When the animal sees the lever, presses it, and something good happens, the activity of the reinforcement system strengthens synapse L. The third major category of learning, motor learning , is actually a special form of stimulus-response learning; for that reason I will not discuss it separately in this chapter.
For simplicity's sake, we can think of perceptual learning as the establishment of changes within the sensory systems of the brain, stimulus-response learning as the establishment of connections between sensory systems and motor systems, and motor learning as the establishment of changes within motor systems.
But, in fact, motor learning cannot occur without sensory guidance from the environment.
For example, most skilled movements involve interactions with objects: bicycles, pinball machines, knitting needles, and so on.
Even skilled movements we make by ourselves, such as solitary dance steps, involve feedback from the joints, muscles, vestibular apparatus, eyes, and contact between the feet and the floor.
Motor learning differs from other forms of learning primarily in the degree to which new forms of behavior are learned; the more novel the behavior, the more that neural circuits in the motor systems of the brain must be modified.
(See Figure 14.4 ).

The three forms of learning I have described so far consist primarily of changes in one sensory system, between one sensory system and the motor system, or in the motor system.
But obviously, learning is usually more complex than that.
We are able to learn the relations among individual stimuli.
For example, a somewhat more complex form of perceptual learning involves connections between different areas of the association cortex.
When we hear the sound of a cat meowing in the dark, we can imagine what a cat looks like and what it would feel like if we stroked its fur.

Obviously, the neural circuits in the auditory association cortex that recognize the meow are somehow connected to corresponding circuits in the visual association cortex and the somatosensory association cortex.
These interconnections, too, are accomplished as a result of learning.

Perception of spatial location also involves learning about the relations among many stimuli.
For example, consider what we must learn in order to become familiar with the contents of a room.
Of course, we must learn to recognize each of the objects.
In addition, we must learn the relative locations of the objects with respect to each other.
Thus, when we are located in a particular place in the room, our perceptions of these objects and their locations relative to us tell us exactly where we are.

Other types of learning, such as our ability to remember a sequence of events, requires that we keep track of not only individual stimuli but also the order in which they occur.
As we will see later in this chapter, a special system that involves the hippocampus and related structures appears to perform coordinating functions that are necessary for many types of learning that go beyond single regions of the cerebral cortex.

INTERIM SUMMARY 

Learning produces changes in the way we perceive, act, think, and feel.
It does so by producing changes in the nervous system the circuits responsible for perception, those responsible for the control of movement, and in connections between the two.

Perceptual learning consists primarily of changes in perceptual systems that make it possible for us to recognize stimuli so that we can respond to them appropriately.
Stimulus-response learning consists of connections between perceptual and motor systems.
The most important forms are classical and instrumental conditioning.
Classical conditioning occurs when a neutral stimulus is followed by an unconditional stimulus (US) that naturally elicits an unconditional response (UR).
After this pairing, the neutral stimulus becomes a conditional stimulus (CS); it now elicits the conditional response (CR) by itself.
If these responses include significant activity of the autonomic nervous system, we call them conditioned emotional responses.

Figure 14.4

An overview of perceptual, stimulus-response, and motor learning. 

Instrumental conditioning occurs when a response is followed by a reinforcing stimulus, such as a drink of water for a thirsty animal.
The reinforcing stimulus increases the likelihood that the other stimuli present when the response was made will evoke the response.
Both forms of stimulus-response learning may occur as a result of strengthened synaptic connections, as described by the Hebb rule.

Motor learning, although it may primarily involve changes within neural circuits that control movement, is guided by sensory stimuli; thus, it is actually a form of stimulus-response learning.
Relational learning is the most complex form of learning.
It includes the ability to recognize objects through more than one sensory modality, to recognize the relative location of objects in the environment, and to remember the sequence in which events occurred during particular episodes.

Human Communication 

Verbal behaviors constitute one of the most important classes of human social behavior.
Our cultural evolution has been possible because we can talk and listen, write and read.
Language enables our discoveries to be cumulative; knowledge gained by one generation can be passed on to the next.

The basic function of verbal communication is seen in its effects on other people.
When we talk to someone, we almost always expect our speech to induce the person to engage in some sort of behavior.
Sometimes, the behavior is of obvious advantage to us, as when we ask for an object or for help performing a task.
At other times, we are simply asking for a social exchange: some attention and perhaps some conversation.
Even "idle" conversation is not idle, because it causes another person to look at us and say something in return.
But not all human communication is verbal.
We also exchange information by means of facial expression and gestures and through our tone of voice.
Thus, this chapter describes the physiology of verbal and nonverbal communication: words and emotions.

SPEECH PRODUCTION AND COMPREHENSION: BRAIN MECHANISMS 

Studying Speech Disorders 

Our knowledge of the physiology of language has been obtained primarily by observing the effects of brain lesions on people's verbal behavior.
Although investigators have studied people who have undergone brain surgery or who have sustained head injuries, brain tumors, or infections, most of the observations have been made on people who have suffered strokes, or cerebrovascular accidents .
The most common type of cerebrovascular accident is caused by obstruction of a blood vessel (almost always an artery, but sometimes a vein).
The interruption in blood flow deprives a region of the brain of its blood supply, which causes cells in that region to die.

Most strokes that affect verbal behavior occur in the region of the brain served by the middle cerebral artery.
This vessel branches off the internal carotid artery, follows the lateral fissure, and feeds most of the lateral surface of the brain.
In addition, branches of the middle cerebral artery penetrate and feed subcortical regions such as the thalamus, basal ganglia, and white matter.
The posterior cerebral artery supplies the posterior medial portion of the cerebrum, principally the occipital cortex and underlying white matter.
Strokes in its territory sometimes produce reading deficits.
Strokes of the anterior cerebral artery, which supplies most of the anterior and dorsal medial region of the cerebral hemispheres, seldom produce language disturbances. 
(See Figure 17.1 ).

Study of human brain functions presents difficulties that are not encountered by investigators who use laboratory animals.
The brain lesion occurs naturally and is not placed in a specific location by the investigator.
In the past scientists possessed only crude techniques to infer the location of a living patient's lesion.
To be certain where the lesion was, they had to wait until the patient died so that they could examine the brain.
This situation meant that unless the patient died soon after being studied, the brain was usually not available to the investigator.
Even if the patient did die soon, the family might not give permission for the brain to be removed and examined.
Thus, the development of the CT scanner and, later, the MRI scanner revolutionized the study of the anatomy of verbal behavior.
CT scans and MRI scans provide remarkably good views of obstructive strokes, permitting the investigator to see which regions of the brain are damaged.
In the past few years these scans have resolved many controversies about the location of damage that produces specific deficits. 
(See Figure 17.2 ).

The most important category of speech disorders is aphasia , a primary disturbance in the comprehension or production of speech, caused by brain damage.
Not all speech disturbances are aphasias.
To be classified as aphasic, a patient must have difficulty comprehending, repeating or producing meaningful speech, and this difficulty must not be caused by simple sensory or motor deficits or by lack of motivation.
For example inability to speak caused by deafness or paralysis of the speech muscles is not considered to be aphasia.
In addition, the deficit must be relatively isolated; that is, the patient must appear to be aware of what is happening in his or her environment and to comprehend that others are attempting to communicate.

Figure 17.1

Regions of the human cerebral cortex served by the anterior (black), middle (color), and posterior (gray) cerebral arteries. 

Adapted from Netter, F. H. The Ciba Collection of Medical Illustrations.
Vol. 1: Nervous System.
Summit, NJ .: Ciba Pharmaceutical Products Co., 1953.

Figure 17.2

Two CT scans from a patient with Broca's aphasia. 

The lesion, located in the left frontal lobe, is indicated by the arrows.
(Scans courtesy of Brian Chiango and Jean Dempster, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts).

Lateralization 

Verbal behavior is a lateralized function; most language disturbances occur after damage to the left side of the brain.
The best way to determine which side of the brain is dominant for speech is to perform a Wada test (named after its inventor).
A patient who is about to undergo surgery that might encroach on a speech area receives a short-acting anesthetic in one carotid artery and then, when the effects have worn off, in the other.
Thus, in a few minutes the involvement of both hemispheres in speech functions can be assessed.
ln over 95 percent of right-handed people the left hemisphere is dominant for speech.
That is, when the left hemisphere is anesthetized, the person loses the ability to speak.

However, when the right hemisphere is anesthetized, the person can still talk and carry on a conversation.
The figure is somewhat lower in left-handed people: approximately 70 percent (Rasmussen and Milner, 1977).

Therefore, unless I say otherwise, you can assume that the brain damage described in the first part of this chapter is located in the left (speech-dominant) hemisphere.

Why is one hemisphere specialized for speech?
The perceptual functions of the left hemisphere are more specialized for the analysis of sequences of stimuli, occurring one after the other.
The perceptual functions of the right hemisphere are more specialized for the analysis of space and geometrical shapes and forms, the elements of which are all present at the same time.

Speech is sequential; it consists of sequences of words, which are composed of sequences of sounds.
Thus, it makes sense for the left hemisphere to have become specialized at perceiving speech.
In addition, as we saw in Chapter 8, the left hemisphere (in particular, the left parietal lobe) is involved in the execution of sequences of voluntary movements.
Perhaps this fact accounts for the localization of neural circuits involved in speech production, as well as speech perception, in the left hemisphere.

Although the circuits primarily involved in speech comprehension and production are located in the left hemisphere, it would be a mistake to conclude that the right hemisphere plays no role in speech.
As you will see in a subsequent section of this chapter, our ability to understand the meaning of words and the perceptions and memories that we talk about involve neural circuits besides those directly involved in speech.
Thus, these circuits, too, play a role in verbal behavior.
For example, damage to the right hemisphere produces deficits in people's ability to read maps, perceive spatial relations, and recognize complex geometrical forms.
Thus, people with such damage will not be able to talk about things like maps and complex geometrical forms or to understand what other people have to say about them .
And as you will see, the right hemisphere is involved in control of rhythm and emphasis of speech and in the expression of feelings of emotion in the tone of voice.
Therefore, in some sense, both hemispheres of the brain are involved in speech.

Speech Comprehension: Wernicke's Area 

Comprehension of speech obviously begins in the auditory system, which is needed to detect and analyze sounds.
But as we shall see, the region of the brain that is most important for speech comprehension (Wernicke's area) is also involved in its production-for transforming perceptions and thoughts into meaningful words.

Wernicke's Aphasia 

The primary characteristics of Wernicke's aphasia are poor speech comprehension and production of meaningless speech.
These characteristics may be related: If one cannot understand what words mean, how can one possibly use them correctly in one's own speech?
Wernicke's aphasia is fluent and unlabored; the person does not strain to articulate words and does not appear to be searching for them.
The patient maintains a melodic line, with the voice rising and falling normally.
When you listen to the speech of a person with Wernicke's aphasia, it appears to be grammatical.
That is, the person uses grammatical connecting words like and and but and employs complex verb tenses and subordinate clauses.
However, the words they string together just do not make sense.
They often make paraphasic errors -substitutions of incorrect words or sounds.
For example, table might be pronounced as "trable" or "fable".
In the extreme, speech deteriorates into a meaningless jumble, illustrated by the following quotation: xxx .

Because of their speech deficit, the ability of people with Wernicke's aphasia to comprehend speech must be assessed by asking them to make nonverbal responses to verbal requests.
That is, we cannot assume they do not understand what other people say to them just because they do not give the proper answer.
A commonly used test of comprehension assesses their ability to respond to questions by pointing to objects on a table in front of them.
For example, they are asked to "Point to the one with ink".
If they point to an object other than the pen, they have not comprehended the request.
When tested this way, people with severe Wernicke's aphasia show poor comprehension.

A remarkable fact about people with Wernicke's aphasia is that they often seem unaware of their deficit.
That is, they do not appear to recognize that their speech is faulty, nor do they recognize that they cannot understand the speech of others.
They do not look puzzled when someone tells them something, even though they obviously cannot understand what they hear.
Perhaps their comprehension deficit prevents them from realizing that what they say and hear makes no sense.
They still follow social conventions, taking turns in conversation with the examiner, even though they do not understand what the examiner says.
They remain sensitive to the other person's facial expression and tone of voice and begin talking when he or she asks a question and pauses for an answer.
One patient with Wernicke's aphasia made the following responses when asked to name ten common objects: xxx .

He acted sure of himself and gave no indication that he recognized that most of his responses were meaningless.

The responses he made were not simply new words that he had invented; he was asked several times to name the objects and gave different responses each time (except for cigarette , which he always named correctly).

Even when patients recognize that something is wrong, they appear unsure of what the problem is.
The following quotation illustrates this puzzlement xxx .

The patient appears to recognize that she has a problem of some kind, but she is also saying (I think) that at home she can prepare her own meals and otherwise take care of herself.

Karl Wernicke (1874) reported that the aphasia that soon thereafter received his name is produced by damage to the posterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus, now called Wernicke's area .
Subsequent studies, including recent ones using CT scans, have proved him correct (Kertesz, 1979; Damasio, 1981).

However, almost always, the lesion includes more than Wernicke's area, and most investigators believe that a lesion that damages only Wernicke's area will not produce a severe aphasia.

Because the superior temporal gyrus is a region of auditory association cortex, and because a comprehension deficit is so prominent in Wernicke's aphasia, this disorder has been characterized as a receptive aphasia.
Some investigators have suggested Wernicke's area is the location of memories of the sequences of sounds that constitute words .
Thus, the cortex of the superior temporal gyrus recognizes the sounds of words, just as the cortex of the inferior temporal gyrus recognizes the sight of objects. 
(See Figure 17.3 ).

Figure 17.3

The location of Wernicke's area in the posterior part of the left superior temporal gyrus and its role in speech (Broca's area will be described later).

Of course, Wernicke's area must do more than perform auditory analyses.
After all, people with Wernicke's aphasia have a speech production deficit as well as a speech comprehension deficit.
Wernicke believed (and many modern investigators continue to believe) that the superior temporal gyrus is necessary for the formation of a particular class of memories: auditory "images" of words.
For example, if a person is asked to say the name of an object, perception of the object evokes neural activity in Wernicke's area that corresponds to the sequence of sounds that constitutes the appropriate word.

This neural pattern is transmitted to motor systems in the frontal lobe, which eventually cause movements of the muscles that produce speech.
If Wernicke's area is damaged, people will be unable to comprehend words spoken to them; and when they try to produce their own, the lack of adequate auditory patterns will prevent them from producing meaningful speech.
(See Figure 17.3 ).

Wernicke's area must do even more than this.
As we saw in Chapter 6, damage to the inferior temporal lobe produces visual agnosia: People are not able to recognize common objects by sight, even though they can perceive fine visual details.
But they are aware of their deficit; people with visual agnosia recognize that their visual perception is faulty.
The fact that damage to the visual and auditory association areas of the cortex produce such different effects suggests that Wernicke's area plays a special role in thinking as well as in listening and talking.

Auditory Disconnection of Wernicke's Area: Pure Word Deafness 

The special role of Wernicke's area in the production of speech is demonstrated by another syndrome: pure word deafness .
The term for this disorder is apt; people with pure word deafness have a pure disorder, uncontaminated by other problems.
Although they are not deaf, they cannot understand speech.
As one patient put it, "I can hear you talking, I just cant understand what you're saying".
They can detect sounds, and they respond appropriately to nonspeech sounds such as the barking of a dog, the sound of a doorbell, the chirping of a bird, and so on.
More significantly, their own speech is excellent.

Pure word deafness is produced by bilateral destruction of the primary auditory cortex or by lesions deep in the left temporal lobe that destroy axons that connect Wernicke's area with both the left and the right primary auditory cortex (Coslett, Brashear, and Heilman, 1984).
(See Figure 17.4 ).

Wernicke's area is not damaged, which accounts for the patient's ability to produce normal speech.
In addition, they can read and write normally, and they often ask people to communicate with them by writing.

Although some authorities do not classify pure word deafness as one of the aphasias, this disorder illustrates the importance of Wernicke's area in the acoustical analysis of words.
It also provides an excellent example of a disconnection syndrome .
Verbal behavior consists of many related skills: perceiving a word, understanding its meaning, thinking of a particular word to express a concept, pronouncing a word, and so on.
Although no area of the brain stands in isolation, different regions perform different functions, receiving information from some areas, analyzing this information, and passing on the results of the analysis to other areas.
If a particular input to a given area is destroyed, the area is said to be disconnected from the source of that input, and it obviously can no longer analyze the information normally received by this pathway.
Brian damage that produces pure word deafness deprives Wernicke's area of auditory information and thus abolishes the patient's ability to understand spoken words.

The best way to appreciate the role that Wernicke's area plays in the production of speech is to compare the verbal abilities of people with Wernicke's aphasia with those who have pure word deafness.
In both cases the patient is unable to comprehend speech.
However, a person with pure word deafness has no problem expressing his or her own thoughts in words and can understand written language.
If the only function of Wernicke's area were the recognition of spoken words, then the symptoms of Wernicke's aphasia would be the same as those of pure word deafness.
They are not, which suggests that besides being involved in the recognition of sounds, Wernicke's area is involved in the translation of meaning into sounds.

Figure 17.4

The brain damage that causes pure word deafness

Speech Production: Broca's Aphasia 

Another form of aphasia tells us something about the brain mechanisms involved in the production of speech.

Unlike Wernicke's aphasia, which is characterized by fluent but meaningless speech, Broca's aphasia is characterized by slow, laborious, and nonfluent speech.
When trying to converse with patients who have Broca's aphasia, most people find it hard not to try to help them by supplying the words they are obviously groping for.
But although they often mispronounce words, the ones they manage to come out with are meaningful.
As we saw, the speech of people with Wernicke's aphasia is full of the little words with grammatical meaning, such as a, the, some, in, or about .
These words-called function words , because they have important grammatical functions-are almost completely absent in the speech of people with Broca's aphasia.

Conversely, content words -words that convey meaning, including nouns, adjectives, and adverbs-are sparse in the speech of people with Wernicke's aphasia but rich in the speech of Broca's aphasics.
Here is a sample of speech from a man with Broca's aphasia, who is telling the examiner why he has come to the hospital.
The dots indicate long pauses xxx .

People with Broca's aphasia can comprehend speech much better than they can produce it.
In fact, some observers have said that their comprehension is unimpaired, but as we will see, this is not quite true.
Broca (1861) suggested that this form of aphasia is produced by a lesion of the frontal association cortex, just anterior to the face region of the primary motor cortex.

Subsequent research proved him to be essentially correct, and we now call the region Broca's area .
(Refer to Figure 17.3 ).

Lesions that produce Broca's aphasia are certainly centered in the vicinity of Broca's area However, although Broca's aphasia has been studied for many years, the anatomical basis e this disorder is still unsettled.

For example, damage to the precentral gyrus, as well as Broca's area itself, may contribute to this disorder; Mori, Yamadori, and Furumoto (1989) found that a patient with a lesion restricted to the base of the motor cortex displayed a mild case of Broca's aphasia.
Naeser et al (1989) suggest that damage to axons Lying between the lateral surface of the brain and the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle may be critical; they report some cases of patients with extensive cortical damage without Broca's aphasia and patients with lesions restricted to the subcortical white matter with aphasia.
The subcortical lesions disrupt communication between the frontal neocortex and the basal ganglia and cingulate gyrus.
Finally, there is evidence that lesions of the basal ganglia-especially the head of the caudate nucleus-can also produce a Broca-like aphasia (Damasio, Eslinger, and Adams,1984).

Wernicke (1874) suggested (and many modern investigators concur) that Broca's area contains memories of the sequences of muscular movements that are needed to articulate words .
For example, consider your ability to say the word ball .
You take a breath, press your lips together, begin expelling air through your vocal cords, and simultaneously open your lips, letting out a small puff of air, forming the sound of the b.
Your tongue begins in a relaxed position in the middle of your mouth and remains there as you make the vowel sound.
Then the end of your tongue moves up and touches the roof of your mouth behind your teeth, remains for a while, and then falls back forming the sound of the l.
The word completed, you relax your vocal cords and stop exhaling. 
(Try saying the word as you read this description again).
Obviously, circuits of neurons somewhere in your brain represent this pattern and when properly activated, will cause the sequence of movements to be executed.
Because damage to the inferior caudal left frontal lobe (including Broca's area) disrupts the ability to articulate words, this region is the most likely candidate to the location of these "programs".

Figure 17.3

The location of Wernicke' s area in the posterior part of the left superior temporal gyrus and its role in speech (Broca's area will be described later)

But the speech functions of the left frontal lobe include more than programming the movements used to speak.
In general, three major speech deficits are produced by lesions in and around Broca's area: agrammatism, anomia , and articulation difficulties .
Although most patients with Broca's aphasia will have all of these deficits to some degree, their severity can vary considerably from person to person.

Agrammatism refers to a patient's difficulty in using grammatical constructions.
This disorder can appear all by itself, without any difficulty in pronouncing words (Nadeau, 1988).
As we saw, people with Broca's aphasia rarely use function words.
In addition, they rarely use grammatical markers such as -ed or auxiliaries such as have (as in I have gone ).
For some reason, they do often use -ing , perhaps because this ending converts a verb into a noun.
A study by Saffran, Schwartz, and Marin (1980) illustrates this difficulty.
The following quotations are from agrammatic patients attempting to describe pictures: xxx .

The second major speech deficit seen in Broca's aphasia is anomia ("without name").
Anomia refers to a word-finding difficulty; and because all aphasics omit words or use inappropriate ones, anomia is actually a primary symptom of all forms of aphasia.
However, because their speech lacks fluency, the anomia of Broca's aphasics is especially apparent; their facial expression and frequent use of sounds like "uh" make it obvious that they are groping for the correct words.
In contrast, people with Wernicke's aphasia seldom pause in their speech and appear satisfied with their utterances; thus, their anomia is less apparent.

The third major characteristic of Broca's aphasia is difficulty with articulation .
Patients mispronounce words, often altering the sequence of sounds.
For example, lipstick might be pronounced "lipstip".
Unlike Wernicke's aphasics, people with Broca's aphasia recognize that their pronunciation is erroneous, and they usually try to correct it.

As I said, these three deficits are seen in various combinations in different patients, depending on the exact location of the lesion, and, to a certain extent, on their stage of recovery.
Although the anatomical correlates are not yet worked out, we can characterize these deficits hierarchically.
On the lowest, most elementary level is control of the sequence of movements of the muscles of speech.
The next higher level is selection of the particular "programs" for individual words.
Finally, the highest level is selection of grammatical structure, including word order, use of function words, and word endings.
Presumably, the control of articulation involves the face area of the primary motor cortex and portions of the basal ganglia; the selection of words, word order, and grammatical markers involves Broca's area and other regions of the frontal association cortex.

So far, I have described Broca's aphasia as a disorder in speech production.
In an ordinary conversation Broca's aphasics seem to understand everything that is said to them.
They appear to be irritated and annoyed by their inability to express their thoughts well, and they often make gestures to supplement their scanty speech.
The marked disparity between their speech and their comprehension often leads people to assume that their comprehension is normal.
But it is not.
Schwartz, Saffran, and Marin (1980) showed Broca's aphasics pairs of pictures in which agents and objects of the action were reversed: for example, a horse kicking a cow and a cow kicking a horse, a truck pulling a car and a car pulling a truck, and a dancer applauding a clown and a clown applauding a dancer.
As they showed each pair of pictures, they read the subject a sentence, for example, The horse kicks the cow .
The subject's task was to point to the appropriate picture, indicating whether they understood the grammatical construction of the sentence.
(See Figure 17.5 ).

Figure 17.5

An example of the stimuli used in the experiment by Schwartz, Saffran, and Marin (1980). 

On the average, they scored 62 percent correct, which is not much above chance.

The correct picture in the study by Schwartz and her colleagues was specified by a particular aspect of grammar: word order.
The agrammatism that accompanies Broca's aphasia appears to disrupt patients' ability to use grammatical information, including word order, to decode the meaning of a sentence.
Thus, their deficit in comprehension parallels their deficit in production.
If they heard a sentence such as The man swats the mosquito , they would understand that it concerns a man and a mosquito and the action of swatting.

Obviously, they would have no trouble figuring out who is doing what to whom.
But a sentence such as The horse kicks the cow does not provide any extra cues; if the grammar is not understood, neither is the meaning of the sentence.

Other experiments have shown that people with Broca's aphasia have difficulty carrying out a sequence of commands such as "Pick up the red circle and touch the green square with it" (Boller and Dennis, 1979).
This finding, along with the other symptoms l have described in this section, suggests that an important function of the left frontal lobe is sequencing-of movements of the muscles of speech (producing words) and of words (comprehending and producing grammatical speech).

ANXIETY DISORDERS 

As we have just seen, the affective disorders are characterized by unrealistic extremes of emotion: depression or elation (mania).
The anxiety disorders are characterized by unrealistic, unfounded fear and anxiety.
This section will describe two of the anxiety disorders that appear to have biological causes: panic disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder.

Panic Disorder 

Description 

People with panic disorder suffer from episodic attacks of acute anxiety-periods of acute and unremitting terror that grip them for variable lengths of time, from a few seconds to a few hours.
The estimated incidence of panic disorder is between 1 and 2 percent of the population (Robbins et al, 1984).
Women are approximately twice as likely as men to suffer from panic disorder.
The disorder usually has its onset in young adulthood; it rarely begins after age thirty-five (Woodruff, Guze, and Clayton, 1972).

Panic attacks include many physical symptoms, such as shortness of breath, clammy sweat, irregularities in heartbeat, dizziness, faintness, and feelings of unreality.
The victim of a panic attack often feels that he or she is going to die.
Anxiety is a normal reaction to many stresses of life, and none of us is completely free from it.
In fact, anxiety is undoubtedly useful in causing us to be more alert and to take important things seriously.
However, the anxiety we all feel from time to time is obviously different from the intense fear and terror experienced by a person gripped by a panic attack.

Between panic attacks, many people with panic disorder suffer from anticipatory anxiety - the fear that another panic attack will strike them.
This anticipatory anxiety often leads to the development of a serious phobic disorder: agoraphobia ( agora means "open space").

According to the American Psychiatric Association's official Diagnostic and Statistical Manual III-R , agoraphobia associated with panic attacks is a fear of "being in places or situations from which escape might be difficult (or embarrassing) or in which help might not be available in the event of a panic attack.
As a result of this fear, the person either restricts travel or needs a companion when away from home".
Agoraphobia can be severely disabling; some people with this disorder have stayed inside their houses or apartments for years, afraid to venture outside.

Possible Causes 

Because the physical symptoms of panic attacks are so overwhelming, many patients reject the suggestion that they have a mental disorder, insisting that their problem is medical.
ln fact, they may be correct: A considerable amount of evidence suggests that panic disorder may have biological origins.
First, the disorder appears to be hereditary; there is a higher concordance rate for the disorder between monozygotic twins than between dizygotic twins (Slater and Shields, l969), and almost 30 percent of the first-degree relatives of a person with panic disorder also have panic disorder (Crowe, Noyes, Pauls, and Slymen, 1983).
The pattern of panic disorder within a family tree suggests that the disorder is caused by a single, dominant gene (Crowe, Noyes, Wilson, Elston, and Ward, 1987).

Panic attacks can be triggered i n people with a history of panic disorder by giving them injections of lactic acid (a by-product of muscular activity) or by having them breathe air containing an elevated amount of carbon dioxide (Gaffney, Fenton, Lane, and Lake, 1988; Woods, Charney, Goodman, and Heninger, 1988).
Cowley and Arana (1990) report that between 40 and 60 percent of people with such a history will react to an injection on a particular occasion.

Susceptibility to lactate-induced panic attacks appears to be at least partly heritable.
Balon, Jordan, Pohl, and Yeragani (1989) infused forty-five normal subjects with sodium lactate and found that ten of them had panic attacks.
The investigators obtained the family history of their subjects, using an interviewer who did not know which subjects had had panic attacks.
They found that over 24 percent of the relatives of the subjects with the panic attacks themselves had a history of anxiety disorders, compared with less than 8 percent in the nonresponders.

Several studies have measured cerebral blood flow by means of PET scans during panic attacks triggered by an injection of lactate.
Reiman et al (1986) found that the activity of the parahippocampal gyrus rose just before the panic attack occurred, and that the activity of the anterior ends of the temporal lobes was elevated during the attack itself.
Reiman, Fusselman, Fox, and Raichle (1989) produced anticipatory anxiety in normal subjects by leading them to believe that they were about to receive an intensely painful electric shock.
(The subjects received a mild shock at the beginning of the experiment to make them believe what the experimenters said, but they did not actually receive a strong shock).

The PET scan showed that in normal subjects, too, anxiety produces increased activity of the temporal poles.
(See Color Plate 18.1 ).

Reiman and his colleagues note that studies with laboratory animals also suggest that the temporal poles are involved in anxiety reactions.
For example, stimulation of this region in monkeys produces autonomic responses and facial expressions indicating fear, and humans with epilepsy caused by a focus in the anterior temporal lobes often report feelings of anxiety and fear just before their seizures occur.
Of course, even if the anterior temporal cortex is involved in an anxiety reaction, we have no reason to suspect that panic disorder is caused by an abnormality in this region; the reaction could be provoked by an abnormality elsewhere in the brain.

Anxiety disorders are usually treated by a combination of behavior therapy and a benzodiazepine.
As we saw in Chapter 3, benzodiazepines have strong anxiolylic ("anxiety dissolving") effects.

The brain possesses benzodiazepine receptors, which are part of the GABA receptor complex.
When a benzodiazepine agonist binds with its receptor, it increases the sensitivity of the GABA binding site and produces an anxiolytic effect.
On the other hand, when a benzodiazepine inverse agonist occupies the receptor site, it reduces the sensitivity of the GABA binding site and increases anxiety.

Anxiety disorders, then, might be caused by a diminished number of benzodiazepine receptors or by the secretion of a neuromodulator that acts as an inverse agonist at benzodiazepine receptors.

As we saw earlier in this chapter, rats who receive an antidepressant medication (clomipramine) early in life later develop the symptoms of depression, which can be reduced by an antidepressant drug or by REM sleep deprivation.
Similarly, fearfulness can be produced in cats by prenatal administration of a benzodiazepine tranquilizer.
Marczynski and Urbancic (1988) gave pregnant cats injections of diazepam (Valium) and assessed the fearfulness of the offspring of these cats when they were one year old.
They found that the animals showed restlessness and anxiety in novel situations.
This fearfulness could be reduced with an injection of diazepam.
Afterward, they measured the level of benzodiazepine receptors in the animals' brains and found a decrease in the hypothalamus, frontal cortex, anterior parietal cortex, and midline thalamus.

Thus, fearfulness appears to be associated with a decreased number of benzodiazepine receptors and, presumably, lower sensitivity to the endogenous benzodiazepine agonist, whatever that may be.

Obsessive Compulsive Disorder 

Description 

As the name implies, people with an obsessive compulsive disorder suffer from obsessions - thoughts that will not leave them-and compulsions -behaviors that they cannot keep from performing.
Obsessions are seen in a variety of mental disorders, including schizophrenia.

However, unlike schizophrenics, people with obsessive compulsive disorder recognize that their thoughts and behaviors are senseless and desperately wish that they would go away.
Compulsions often become more and more demanding, until they interfere with people's careers and daily lives.

The incidence of obsessive compulsive disorder is approximately 2 percent.
Females are slightly more likely than males to have this diagnosis.
Like panic disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder most commonly begins in young adulthood (Robbins et al, 1984).
People with this disorder are unlikely to marry, perhaps because of the common obsessional fear of dirt and contamination or because of the shame associated with the rituals they are compelled to perform, which causes them to avoid social contacts (Turner, Beidel, and Nathan, 1985).

Most compulsions fall into one of four categories: counting, checking, cleaning, and avoidance .
For example, people might repeatedly check burners on the stove to see that they are off and windows and locks to be sure that they are locked.
Davison and Neale (1974) reported the case of a woman who washed her hands more than five hundred times a day because she feared being contaminated by germs.
The hand washing persisted even when her hands became covered with painful sores.

Other people meticulously clean their apartment or endlessly wash, dry, and fold their clothes.
Some become afraid to leave home because they fear contamination and refuse to touch other members of their family.
If they do accidentally become "contaminated," they usually have lengthy purification rituals.
(See Table 18.2 ).

Some investigators believe that the compulsive behaviors seen in obsessive compulsive disorder are forms of species-typical behaviors-for example, grooming, cleaning, and attention toward sources of potential danger-that are released from normal control mechanisms by a brain dysfunction (Wise and Rapoport, 1988).

Possible Causes 

Evidence is beginning to accumulate suggesting that obsessive compulsive disorder may have a genetic origin.

Family studies have found that this disorder is associated with a neurological disorder that appears during childhood (Pauls and Leckman, 1986; Pauls, Towbin, Leckman, Zahner, and Cohen, 1986).
This disorder, Tourette's syndrome , is characterized by muscular and vocal tics: facial grimaces, squatting, pacing, twirling, barking, sniffing, coughing, grunting, or repeating specific words (especially vulgarities).

Pauls and his colleagues believe that the two disorders are produced by the same single, dominant gene.
It is not clear why some people with the faulty gene develop Tourette's syndrome early in childhood and others develop obsessive compulsive disorder later in life.

Not all cases of obsessive compulsive disorder have a genetic origin; the disorder sometimes occurs after brain damage caused by various means, such as birth trauma, encephalitis, and head trauma (Hollander et al, 1990).
As we saw in the first part of this chapter, schizophrenia, too, appears to have both hereditary and nonhereditary causes.

Several studies using PET scans have found evidence of increased glucose metabolism in the frontal lobes, caudate nucleus, and cingulate gyrus (Baxter et al, 1987, 1989; Swedo et al, 1989).
These three structures are closely interconnected, and investigators have long considered them to be involved in emotional reactions.
ln fact, some patients with severe obsessive compulsive disorder have been successfully treated with surgical destruction of the cingulum bundle, a group of axons that connects the prefrontal and cingulate cortex with the limbic cortex of the temporal lobe (Ballantine, Bouckoms, Thomas, and Giriunas, 1987).
Obviously, because a brain lesion cannot be undone, these operations are performed only in severe cases, after behavior therapy and drug therapy have been found to be ineffective.

Table 18.2

Reported obsessions and compulsions of child and adolescent patients. 

By far, the most effective treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder is drug therapy.
So far, three effective drugs have been found: clomipramine, fluoxetine, and fluvoxamine.
Although these drugs are also effective antidepressants, their antidepressant action does not seem to be related to their ability to relieve the symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder.

For example, Leonard et al (1989) compared the effects of clomipramine and desipramine (an antidepressant drug) on the symptoms of children and adolescents with severe obsessive compulsive disorder.
For three weeks all patients received a placebo.
Then for five weeks half of them received clomipramine (CMI) and the other half received desipramine (DMI), on a double-blind basis.
At the end of that time, the drugs were switched.
As Figure 18.13 shows, CMI was a much more effective drug; in fact, when the patients were switched from CMI to DMI, their symptoms got worse. 
(See Figure 18.13 ).

All of the effective antiobsessional drugs are specific blockers of 5-HT reuptake; thus, they are specific serotonergic agonists.
In general, serotonin has an inhibitory effect on species- typical behaviors, which has tempted several investigators to speculate that these drugs alleviate the symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder by reducing the strength of the washing, cleaning, and danger avoidance behaviors that may underlie this disorder.

Figure 18.13

Mean rating of symptom severity of patients with obsessive compulsive disorder treated with desipramine (DMI) or clomipramine (CMI)
