
Targeted Gene Replacement

Researchers can now create mice bearing any chosen mutations in any known gene.
The technology is revolutionizing the study of mammalian biology.

Every cell of our bodies has within its nucleus an instruction manual that species its function.
Al though each cell carries the same manual, different cell types, such as liver or skin, use different parts of this manual to detail their unique functions.
Perhaps most remarkable, the manual contains the information that allows a one-cell embryo, the fertilized egg, to become a fetus and then a newborn child.
As the child matures physically and intellectually, he or she is still using the information within the instruction manual.
We are each unique, and the manual is slightly different for each of us; it specifies most of the physical and many of the behavioral characteristics that distinguish us as individuals.

This extraordinary manual, otherwise known as the genome, is written in the form of nucleotides, four of which constitute the entire alphabet-adenylate (A), cytidylate (C), guanylate (G) and thymidylate (T).
It is the precise sequence of the nucleotides in DNA that conveys information, much as the sequence of letters in a word conveys meaning.
During each cell division, the entire manual is replicated, and a copy is handed down from the mother cell to each of its two daughters. 
In humans and mice, the manuals each contain three billion nucleotides.
If the letters representing the nucleotides were writ ten down in order so that a page carried 3,000 characters, the manual would occupy 1,000 volumes, each consisting of 1,000 pages.
Thus, a very complex manual is required to orchestrate the creation of a human or mouse from a fertilized egg.

Recently my colleagues at the University of Utah and I developed the technology for specifically changing a letter, a sentence or several paragraphs in the instruction manual within every cell of a living mouse.
By rewriting parts of the manual and evaluating the consequences of the altered instructions on the development or the postdevelopmental functioning of the mouse, we can gain insight into the program that governs these processes.

The functional units within the instruction manual are genes.
We specifically change the nucleotide sequence of a chosen gene and thereby alter its function.
For instance, if we suspected a particular gene were involved in brain development, we could generate mouse embryos in which the normal gene was "knocked out"-that is, completely in activated.
If this inactivation caused newborn mice to have a malformed cerebellum, we would know that the gene in question was essential to forming that part of the brain.
The process by which specified changes are introduced into the nucleotide sequence of a chosen gene is termed gene targeting.

Much of what is learned from gene targeting experiments in mice should benefit humans, because an estimated 99 percent or more of the genes in mice and humans are the same and serve quite similar purposes.
Application of the technology in mice is already clarifying not only the steps by which human embryonic development occurs but also the ways in which our immune system is formed and used to fight infection.
Gene targeting should also go far toward explaining such mysteries as how the human brain operates and how defects in genes give rise to disease. 
In the latter effort the technique is being used to produce mouse models of human disorders-among them, cystic fibrosis, cancer and atherosclerosis.

Excitement over gene targeting stems from another source as well.
It promises to expand on the knowledge generated by the genome project.
This large scale undertaking aims to determine the nucleotide sequence of every gene in the mouse and human genomes (approximately 200,000 genes in each).
Currently we know the functions of only a minute percentage of the genes in either species.
The nucleotide sequence of a gene specifies the amino acids that must be strung together to make a particular protein.
(Proteins carry out most of the activities in cells.)
The amino acid sequence of a protein yields important clues to its roles in cells, such as whether it serves as an enzyme, a structural component of the cell or a signaling molecule.
But the sequence alone is not sufficient to reveal the particular tasks performed by the protein during the life of the animal.
In contrast, gene targeting can provide this information and thereby move our understanding of the functions of genes and their proteins to a much deeper level.

Gene targeting offers investigators a new way to do mammalian genetics -that is, to determine how genes mediate various biological processes.
This technique was needed be cause the classical methods of genetics, which have been highly successful in analyzing biological processes in simpler organisms, were not readily adaptable to organisms as complex as mammals.

If geneticists want to learn, for example, how single-cell organisms, such as bacteria or yeast, replicate their DNA, they can expose a billion or more individuals to a DNA-damaging chemical (a mutagen).
By choosing the right dosage of mutagen, they can ensure that each individual in that population carries a mutation in one or more genes.
From this population of mutagenized bacteria or yeast, the geneticists can identify individuals not capable of replicating their DNA.
The use of such a large mutagenized population makes it likely that separate individuals will be found with mutations in each of the genes required for DNA replication.
( For a process as complicated as duplicating the bacterial or yeast genome, more than 100 genes are involved.)
Once the individual genes are identified, their specific role in DNA replication, such as which genes control the decision to copy the DNA and which control the accuracy and rate of copying, can be determined.

Similar approaches have been applied to multicellular organisms, which are more complex.
Two favorites of geneticists are Caenorhabditis elegans , a tiny, soil-dwelling worm, and Drosophila melanogaster , a common fruit fly.
But even in these relatively simple forms of multicellular organisms, identifying all the genes involved in a specific biological process is more demanding.

A number of factors contribute to this increased difficulty. 
One is the size of the genome.
The genome of the bacterium Escherichia coli includes only 3,000 genes, whereas that of D. melanogaster contains at least 20,000 genes; the mouse genome contains 10 times that number.
With added genes comes added complexity, because the genes form more intricate, interacting net works.
Tracing the effect of any one gene in such an involved network is a formidable task.

Moreover, the larger size of multicellular organisms places practical limits on the number of individuals that can be included in a mutagenesis experiment.
It is fairly simple and inexpensive to search for specific kinds of mutants among more than a billion mutagenized bacteria or yeast.
In contrast, screening even 100,000 mutagenized fruit flies would constitute a large experiment.
By comparison, the practical limits on screening mice for a particular mutation would be reached at about 1,000 animals.

The logistical difficulties of identifying and studying genes in multicellular organisms are further increased by the fact that most are diploid -their cells carry two copies of most genes, one inherited from the father and a second from the mother. 
For survival purposes, having two copies of most genes is valuable.
If one copy acquires a harmful mutation, the other copy can usually compensate, so that no serious consequences result.
Such redundancy, how ever, means that a mutation will elicit anatomical or physiological defects in the organism only if both copies of the gene are damaged.
Investigators pro duce such individuals by mating parents who each carry the mutation in one copy of the gene.
Approximately one fourth of the offspring of such matings will bear two defective copies of the gene.
The need for matings introduces delays in the analysis.

Despite the challenges, the identification of selected mutations in whole animals is unquestionably the most informative way to begin clarifying and separating the steps by which biological processes are carried out.
Furthermore, if we want to under stand processes that occur only in complex organisms, such as the mounting of a sophisticated immune response, such analysis must be pursued in those organisms.
For these reasons, geneticists interested in mammalian development, neural function, immune response, physiology and disease have turned to the mouse. 
From a geneticist's point of view, the mouse is an ideal mammal.
It is small and prolific and serves as a remarkably good analogue for most human biological processes.

On the other hand, the breadth of genetic manipulations that can be carried out in mice has been extremely limited relative to the operations that are possible in simpler organisms.
Because of the obstacles I have already described, it is not practical to apply classical techniques to mice.
To identify mutagenized mice carrying defects in the genes involved in some process of interest, re searchers would have to screen 10,000 to 100,000 mice at a prohibitive cost.
Instead mouse geneticists have historically studied mutant animals that arose spontaneously within their colonies.
As a result of the keen observation and perseverance by such workers, the collection of existing mouse mutants is surprisingly large and is an invaluable resource for continued research.

Yet even these hard-won animals have drawbacks.
The existing collection of mutant mice does not harbor a random sampling of mutations in the mouse genome.
Rather it contains a disproportionate number of mutations that result in readily observable abnormalities in physiology or behavior.
In consequence, many mutations that affect coat color are present in this collection, whereas mutations that affect early development are underrepresented (since they often result in the undetected death of the embryo).

Further, the task of isolating the genes responsible for overt defects in mutant mice is very labor intensive, of ten taking years of concerted effort.
Workers can deduce many steps involved in biological phenomena with out ever finding the genes involved.
But without isolating those genes, they can not make progress at the molecular level.
Notably, they cannot determine the nature of the proteins encoded by the mutated genes, nor can they identify the cells in which the genes are active.

Gene targeting allows investigators to circumvent such difficulties.
Investigators now choose which gene to alter. 
They also have virtually complete control over how that gene is modified, so that the mutation can be tailor-made to address precise questions about the functions of the gene.
The criteria for selecting which gene to mutate can be based on knowledge obtained from re search on mice or other species. 
For example, it is now relatively straightforward to isolate a series of genes that are active in the newly forming mouse heart; gene targeting would then permit determining the role of each of those genes in heart development.
Alternatively, we can ascertain whether a set of genes known to be involved in guiding the paths taken by developing neurons in D. melanogaster exist and serve a similar function in the mouse.

An initial approach often involves knocking out a gene in order to evaluate the consequences to the organism of not having the gene product.
The consequences may be complex and may affect multiple pathways.
Further insight into the gene's function can be obtained by introducing more subtle, de fined mutations, which may affect only one of its multiple roles.
Soon geneticists should be able to place genes under control of a switch.
Such switches will allow researchers to turn a gene on and off during the embryonic or postnatal development of the mouse.

For example, a hypothetical gene could be responsible for the creation and proper operation of a set of nerve cells.
Knocking out the gene would result in the absence of those neurons during formation of the brain and preclude assessing the gene's activity in the adult.
If the gene were under control of a switch, however, the switch could be left on during development, and the neurons would be formed.
In the adult the switch could then be turned off, enabling workers to evaluate the function of this gene in adult neurons.

Development of gene-targeting technology has evolved over the past 15 years.
In the late 1970s I was experimenting with using extremely small glass needles to inject DNA directly into the nuclei of mammalian cells.
The needles were controlled by hydraulically driven micromanipulators and directed into nuclei with the aid of a high-powered microscope.
The procedure turned out to be extremely efficient.
One in three to five cells received the DNA in a functional form and went on to divide and stably pass that DNA on to its daughter cells. 

When I followed the fate of these DNA molecules in cells, a surprising phenomenon captured my attention.
Although the newly introduced DNA molecules were randomly inserted into one of the recipient cell's chromosomes, more than one molecule could be inserted at that site, and all of them were in the same orientation.
Just as words in any language have an orientation (in English we read words from left to right), so, too, do DNA molecules.
Apparently, before cells performed random insertion, some mechanism in the cell nucleus stitched virtually all the introduced DNA molecules together in the same orientation.

We went on to demonstrate that cells used a process called homologous recombination to achieve such linkages.
Homologous recombination works only on DNA molecules with the same nucleotide sequence.
Such molecules line up next to each other.
Then both molecules are cut and are joined to each other at the cut ends.
The joining is accomplished with such precision that the nucleotide sequences at the points of linkage are not altered.

This unexpected observation implied that all mouse cells, and presumably all mammalian cells, had the machinery to perform homologous recombination.
At the time, there was no reason to suspect that somatic cells (those not involved in sexual reproduction) would have this machinery.
Further, we knew the machinery was fairly efficient be cause we could microinject more than 100 DNA molecules of the same sequence, and the cell would stitch them all together in the same orientation.
I realized immediately that if we could harness this machinery to carry out homologous recombination between a newly introduced DNA molecule of our choice and the same DNA sequence in a cell's chromosome, we would have the ability to rewrite the cell's instruction manual at will.

Excited by this prospect, in 1980 I re quested funding from the government to test the feasibility of gene targeting. 
To my disappointment, the scientists who reviewed the grant proposal rejected it.
In their view, the probability that the newly introduced DNA sequence would ever find its matching sequence within the 1,000 volumes of the genetic instruction manual seemed vanishingly small.

Despite the rejection, I decided to forge ahead using funds I was receiving for another project.
It was a gamble. 
Had the experiments failed, I would have had little meaningful data to submit at grant renewal time.
Fortunately, the experiments worked.
By 1984, when we again asked for funds to pursue the research, we had ample evidence that gene targeting was in fact feasible in cells.
Many of the same scientists who had reviewed the original grant proposal now demonstrated a sense of humor.
The critique of the new proposal opened with the statement, "We are glad that you didn't follow our advice."

How is gene targeting in cells accomplished?
The first step is to clone the gene of interest and propagate it in bacteria.
This procedure provides a pure source of DNA containing the gene.
Next, in a test tube, the nucleotide sequence of the gene is changed to meet the purpose of the experiment. 
The altered gene is referred to as the targeting vector. 
The targeting vector is introduced into living cells by any of several means.
Once within the cell nucleus, it forms a complex with proteins constituting the cell's machinery for homologous re combination.
Aided by these proteins, it searches through all the sequences of the genome until it finds its counter part (the target).
If it indeed does find its target, it will line up next to that gene and replace it.
Regrettably, such targeted replacement occurs only in a small fraction of the treated cells.
More often, the targeting vector inserts randomly at non matching sites or fails to integrate at all.
We must therefore sort through the cells to identify those in which targeting has succeeded. 
Approximately one in a million treated cells has the de sired targeted replacement.

To greatly simplify the search for that cell, we make use of two "selectable markers," which are introduced into the targeting vector from the start.
Inclusion of a "positive" selectable marker promotes survival and growth of cells that have incorporated the targeting vector, either at the target site or at a random location within the genome.
Inclusion of the "negative" selectable marker helps to eliminate most of the cells that have incorporated the targeting vector at a random location.

The positive marker, usually a neomycin-resistance (neo') gene, is positioned so that it will be flanked by DNA also present in the target gene.
The negative marker, typically the thymi dine kinase (tk) gene from a herpes virus, is attached to one end of the tar geting vector [see illustration on pages 54 and 55].
When homologous recombination occurs, the unchanged segments of the cloned gene, together with the near gene sandwiched between them, replace the target sequence in the chromosome.
But the tk gene, lying outside the zone of matching sequences, does not enter the chromosome and is degraded by the cell.
In contrast, when cells randomly insert the targeting vector, they stitch the entire vector, complete with the tk gene, into the DNA.
When no insertion occurs, the vector and both its markers are lost.

We do not have to examine the DNA directly to identify these different out comes.
Instead we grow the cells in a medium containing two drugs, an analogue of neomycin called G418 and the antiherpes drug ganciclovir.
G418 kills cells that lack the protective near gene in their chromosomes, namely, those that have failed to integrate vector DNA.
But it allows cells that carry either random or targeted insertions to survive and grow.
Concurrently the ganciclovir kills any cells that carry the herpes tk gene, namely, those that harbor a random insertion.
In the end, virtually the only surviving cells are those bearing the targeted insertion (cells possessing the "positive selectable" near gene and lacking the "negative se lectable" tk gene).

By 1984 we had shown that it was possible to target specific genes in cultured mouse cells.
We were then ready to extend the technology to alter the genome of living mice.
To accomplish this aim, we used special cells developed in 1981 by Matthew H., Kaufman and Martin J., Evans of the University of Cambridge.
These cells are embryo-derived stem (ES) cells. 
Such cells are obtained from an early mouse embryo.
They can be cultured in petri dishes indefinitely, and they are pluripotent:
capable of giving rise to all cell types. 

In brief, by the procedure described earlier, we produce ES cells known to carry a targeted mutation in one copy of a chosen gene.
Then we put the ES cells into early mouse embryos, which are allowed to develop to term.
Some of the resulting mice, when mature, will produce sperm derived from the ES cells.
By mating such mice to normal mice, we generate offspring that are heterozygous for the mutation -they carry the mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in every cell. 

These heterozygotes will be healthy in most instances, because their second, undamaged copy of the gene will still be functioning properly.
But mating of these heterozygotes to brothers or sisters bearing the same mutation yields homozygotes: 
animals carrying the targeted mutation in both copies of the gene.
Such animals will display abnormalities that will reveal the normal functions of the target gene in all their tissues.

Of course, the procedure is more easily summarized than carried out.
To actually do the work, we begin by injecting our modified ES cells into blastocyst-stage embryos, which have not yet become attached to the mother's uterus.
Because we depend on coat color to indicate whether the procedure is going according to plan, we choose blastocysts that would normally develop into pups bearing a different coat color than is found in pups produced by the mouse strain from which the ES cells are obtained.

The stem cells are isolated from a brown mouse carrying two copies of the agouti gene.
This gene, even when present in a single copy, produces brown coloring by causing yellow pigment to be laid down next to black pigment in the hair shaft.
(Production of the pigments themselves is under the control of other genes.)
Hence, we typically select blastocysts that would normally develop into black mice.
( Mice acquire black coats when the agouti gene inherited from both parents is defective.)
Then we allow the embryo, containing the modified ES cells, to grow to term in a surrogate mother.

If all goes well, the altered ES cells reproduce repeatedly during this time, passing complete copies of all their genes to their daughter cells.
These cells mix with those of the embryo and con tribute to the formation of most mouse tissues. 
As a result, the newborns are chimeras:
they are composed of cells derived both from the foreign ES cells and from the original embryo.
We readily identify such chimeras by observing broad swatches of brown coloring in their otherwise black coats.
If the animals bore no ES-derived cells, they would be completely black because of their lack of functional agouti genes.

By merely looking at the chimeras, though, we cannot determine whether the ES cells gave rise to germ cells, the vehicle through which the targeted mutation is passed to future generations. 
We find that out only when we move to the next stage: 
producing heterozygous mice harboring one copy of the mutation in all their cells.
To generate such animals, we mate chimeric male mice to black female mice lacking the agouti gene.
An offspring will be brown if the sperm that fertilized the egg was de rived from ES cells (because all such sperm carry the agouti gene).
An off spring will be black if the sperm de rived from the original blastocyst cells (which lack functional agouti genes).

Consequently, when we see brown pups, we know that the genes carried by ES cells made their way to these offspring. 
We can then think about set ting up matings between heterozygous siblings in order to produce mice with two defective copies of the target gene.
First, though, we must discern which of the brown pups carry a copy of the mutated gene.
This we do by examining their DNA directly for the targeted mutation. 
When matings are set up between heterozygous siblings, one in four of the offspring will have two defective copies of the gene.
We pick out the homozygotes by again analyzing DNA directly, this time looking for the presence of two copies of the targeted mutation.
These animals are then examined carefully for any anatomical, physiological or behavioral anomalies that can provide clues to the functions of the disrupted gene. 
The total procedure from cloning a gene to generating mice with a targeted mutation in that gene takes approximately one year.

Laboratories all around the world are now applying gene targeting in mice to study an array of biological problems.
Since 1989, more than 250 strains carrying selected genetic defects have been produced.
A few examples of the emerging findings should illustrate the kinds of insights these animals can provide.

In my own laboratory, we have been exploring the functions of homeotic, or Hox, genes.
These genes serve as master switches ensuring that different parts of the body, such as the limbs, the organs, and parts of the head, form in the appropriate places and take on the correct shapes.
Studies of homeotic genes in Drosophila have yielded important clues to their activities [see "The Molecular Architects of Body Design," by William McGinnis and Michael Kuziora; SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, February].
Yet many questions remain.
For instance, D. melanogaster has only eight Hox genes, whereas mice and humans each have 38.
Presumably, expansion of the Hox family played a critical part in the evolutionary progression from invertebrates to vertebrates, supplying extra machinery needed for a more complex body.
Precisely what do all 38 genes do?

Before gene targeting became avail able, there was no way to answer these questions, because no one had found mice or humans with mutations in any of the 38 Hox genes.
My colleagues and I are now embarking on a systematic effort to establish the function of the individual Hox genes.
Later we will at tempt to identify how these genes form an interactive network to direct the formation of our bodies.

As part of this program, we have discovered that targeted disruption of the HoxA-3 gene leads to multiple defects.
Mice carrying two mutated copies of the gene die at birth from cardiovascular dysfunction brought on by incomplete development of the heart and the major blood vessels issuing from it.
These mice are also born with aberrations in many other tissues, including the thymus and parathyroid (which are missing), the thyroid gland, the bone and cartilage of the lower head, and the connective tissue, muscle and cartilage of the throat.

These abnormalities are diverse but share one striking commonality:
the affected tissues all descend from cells that were originally clustered in a narrow zone in the upper part of the developing embryo.
The rudiments of the heart, for instance, are located in this region before the heart takes up its more posterior location in the chest.
It seems, then, that the assignment of the HoxA-3 gene is to oversee construction of many of the tissues and organs that originate in this narrow region.

Unexpectedly, the disorder produced by knocking out the mouse HoxA-3 gene mimics that found in an inherited human disease known as Di George syndrome.
Chromosomal analysis of patients shows that the human HoxA-3 gene is not the culprit; victims display genetic damage on a chromosome distinct from that housing HoxA-3.
We now know, however, that the gene responsible for the syndrome acts by interfering either with activation of the HoxA-3 gene or with the events set in motion by the HoxA-3 gene.
Also, a mouse model for the disease is now available and may eventually provide clues to treatment.
This unanticipated benefit underscores once again the value of basic research:
findings born of curiosity often lead to highly practical applications. 

Like developmental biologists, immunologists have also benefited from gene targeting.
They are now applying this technology to decipher the individual responsibilities of well over 50 genes that influence the development and operation of the body's two fore most classes of defensive cells -B and T lymphocytes.

Cancer researchers are excited by the technique as well. 
Often investigators know that mutations in a particular gene are common in one or more tumor types, but they do not know the normal role of the gene.
Discovery of that role using our knockout technology can help to reveal how the mutant form of the gene contributes to malignancy.

The p53 tumor suppressor gene offers a case in point.
Tumor suppressor genes are ones whose inactivation contributes to the development or progression of cancer.
Mutations in the p53 gene are found in perhaps 80 percent of all human cancers, but until recently the precise responsibilities of the normal gene were obscure.
The analysis of mice homozygous for a targeted disruption of p53 indicated that p53 probably acts as a watchdog that blocks healthy cells from dividing until they have repaired any damaged DNA that is present in the cell. 
Such damage of ten occurs in cells as a consequence of the frequent environmental insults to which we are subjected. 
The loss of functional p53 genes eliminates this safeguard, allowing damaged DNA to be passed to daughter cells, where it participates in formation of cancers.

Many other diseases will be amenable to study by gene targeting. 
More than 5,000 human disorders have been attributed to genetic defects.
As the genes and mutations for the disorders are identified, workers can create precisely the same mutations in mice.
The mouse models, in turn, should make it possible to trace in detail the events leading from the malfunctioning of a gene to the manifestation of disease.
A deeper understanding of the molecular pathology of the disease should permit the development of more effective therapies.
Among the models now being constructed are mice with different mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene.

The study of atherosclerosis, a leading cause of strokes and heart attacks, is also beginning to involve gene targeting. 
In contrast to cystic fibrosis, atherosclerosis is not caused by mutations in a single gene.
Defects in a number of genes combine with environ mental factors to promote the buildup of plaque in arteries.
Nevertheless, promising mouse models have been made by alterating genes known to be involved in the processing of triglycerides and cholesterol.
I also anticipate that mouse models for hypertension, another culprit in heart disease and stroke, will soon be developed, now that genes thought to participate in its development are being identified.

As understanding of the genetic contribution to disease increases, so will the desire to correct the defects by gene therapy.
At the moment, the techniques used for gene therapy rely on random insertion of healthy genes into chromosomes, to compensate for the damaged version.
But the inserted genes often do not function as effectively as they would if they occupied their as signed places on the chromosome.
In principle, gene targeting can provide a solution to this problem.
Yet, before it can be used to correct the defective gene in a patient's tissue, investigators may need to establish cultures of cells able to participate in formation of that tissue in adults. 
Such cells, which like the ES cells in our studies are termed stem cells, are known to be present in bone marrow, liver, lungs, skin, intestines and other tissues.
But research into ways to isolate and culture these cells is still in its infancy.

Before the technical hurdles to broad application of our methods in gene therapy are surmounted, gene targeting will find common usage in the study of mammalian neurobiology.
Already mice have been prepared with targeted mutations that alter their ability to learn.
As increasing numbers of neural specific genes are identified, the pace of this research will surely intensify. 

We can anticipate continued improvements in gene-targeting technology, but it has already created opportunities to manipulate the mammalian genome in ways that were unimaginable even a few years ago.
To significantly aid in deciphering the mechanisms underlying such complex processes as development or learning in mammals, researchers will have to call on every bit of their available ingenuity, carefully deciding which genes to alter and modifying those genes in ways that will bring forth informative answers.
Gene targeting opens a broad range of possibilities for genetic manipulations, the limitations of which will be set only by the creative limits of our collective imagination.

How Targeted Gene Replacement Is Accomplished in Cultured Cells

1. Workers alter copies of a gene ( strip at far left ) in the test tube to produce what is called the targeting vector ( lengthened strip ).
The gene shown here has been inactivated by insertion of the near gene (green) into a protein coding region (blue). 
The near gene will serve later as a marker to indicate that the vector DNA took up residence in a chromosome.
The vector has also been engineered to carry a second marker at one end: the herpes tk gene (red).
These markers are standard, but others could be used instead.

2. Once a vector, with its dual markers, is complete, it is introduced into cells (gray) isolated from a mouse embryo. 
3. When all goes well, homologous recombination occurs (top) :
the vector lines up next to the normal gene (the target) on a chromosome in a cell, so that the identical regions are aligned; then those regions on the vector (together with any DNA in between) take the place of the original gene, excluding the marker at the tip (red).
In many cells, though, the full vector (complete with the extra marker) fits itself randomly into a chromosome (middle) or does not become integrated at all (bottom).

4. To isolate cells carrying a targeted mutation, workers put all the cells into a medium containing selected drugs, here a neomycin analogue ( G418) and ganciclovir.
G418 is lethal to cells unless they carry a functional near gene, and so it eliminates cells in which no integration of vector DNA has occurred (gray).
Meanwhile ganciclovir kills any cells that harbor a tk gene, thereby eliminating cells bearing a randomly integrated vector (red).
Consequently, virtually the only cells that survive and proliferate are those harboring the targeted insertion (green).


How Targeted Gene Replacement Is Accomplished in Mice

1. Cells known as embryonic stem (ES) cells ( green at far left ) are isolated from a brown mouse strain and altered (by the process described in the illustration on pages 54 and 55) to carry a targeted mutation in one chromosome (inset).
The ES cells are then inserted into young embryos, one of which is shown.
Workers like to use the coat color of the future newborns as a guide to whether the ES cells have survived in the embryo.
Hence, they typically put the ES cells into embryos that, in the absence of the ES cells, would acquire a totally black coat.
Such embryos are obtained from a black strain (below) that lacks the agouti gene.
The agouti gene generates a brown coat even when present in cells as a single copy.

2. The embryos containing the ES cells grow to term in surrogate mothers.
Then workers examine the coats of the newborns.
Brown shading intermixed with black indicates that the ES cells have survived and proliferated in an animal. 
(Such individuals are called chimeras because they contain cells derived from two different strains of mice.)
Solid black coloring, in contrast, would indicate that the ES cells had perished.

3. Chimeric males are mated to black (non-agouti) females.
Then researchers screen the progeny for evidence of the targeted mutation ( green in inset ) in the gene of interest.
They exclude black mice immediately; if the animals had been born of sperm made by ES cells-and so had a chance of harboring the chosen mutation-they would be brown. 
Direct examination of the genes in the brown mice reveals which of those animals (boxed) inherited the targeted mutation. 

4. Males and females carrying the mutation are mated to each other to produce mice whose cells carry the chosen mutation in both copies of the target gene (inset) and thus lack a functional gene.
Such animals (boxed) are identified definitively by direct analyses of their DNA.
Then they are examined carefully for any physical or behavioral abnormalities.


Figure 1

TARGETED MUTATION can be generated in a selected cellular gene by inserting mutated copies of the gene (green and-gold strips at far left) into cells and allowing one copy to take the place of the original, healthy gene (gold fragment at far right) on a chromosome

Such altered cells are helping researchers to produce mice carrying specific genetic mutations.
The finding of a curled tail and a balance-and-hearing disorder in one such mouse (above) led to the discovery that the affected gene, int-2, participates in development of the tail and the inner ear.

Figure 2

NEWBORN mouse (above, left) carries a targeted mutation in both copies of a gene called HoxA-3

Consequently, its body is more curved than that of a normal newborn (second from left ).
Tissue specimens from mutant (center right ) and normal (far right ) mice reveal that such mutants also lack a thymus and have an unusually small thyroid gland.
These disorders and others indicate that the HoxA-3 gene is needed for development of tissues and organs that originate in a narrow strip of cells (colored band in drawing) present in young embryos.
