
ECONOMIC SITUATION 

Each year around the end of January the small Swiss town of Davos is made ready to welcome the meeting of the World Economic Forum, one of the highest level meetings held during the year in Europe.
Business people, politicians, academics and a number of heads of state attend and participate in this informal forum which deals with some of the most discussed current themes.
On this occasion, although this was not the purpose of the meeting, the Davos summit had unexpected effects with the voicing of opinions of German bankers and top officials on the undesirability of the economies in the south of Europe (that is Italy, Spain and Portugal) moving into the euro in 1999 because of their background of instability.
It should be remembered that throughout 1996 prospects of the effective start-up of the single currency on January 1, 1999 had been growing stronger following approval of the detailed calendar for this start-up at the European Council meeting held in December 1995.
Furthermore, the relatively favourable prospects created by the European Commission regarding the meeting of convergence criteria (the requirements necessary to be able to move into the single currency) had strengthened the idea that in 1999 a broad group of countries would be able to begin the adventure of the euro.
The financial markets reflected this situation through a sharp decrease in interest rates especially in the so-called peripheral economies.
The statements made at Davos suddenly cooled off those prospects.
Although the opposition of the more orthodox sectors of monetary opinion in Germany to the incorporation of countries which may put the stability and strength of the future euro in doubt is well known, up until now their positions had not come out into the open so strongly.
Furthermore, on days following the meeting, some newspapers reported on proposed secret plans to exclude the countries of the so-called "Mediterranean Club".
According to these plans, the "hard core" of countries made up of Germany, France, Benelux, and perhaps Austria, Ireland and Finland, would better guarantee the safe delivery of the euro than a broader block.
Perhaps this was the objective of the convergence criteria of the Treaty of Maastricht, a kind of "selection process" in order to guarantee the quality of the single currency.
In any case, the effect of these speculations was negative for the lira, the peseta and the Portuguese escudo.
The convergence of bond rates of those countries with German bonds was interrupted or showed some back-sliding and greater volatility in interest rates ensued.
This was a minor monetary crisis but one whose after-effects were felt all through February.
In the case of Spain, for example, the peseta although it maintained practically the same levels as in January, has encountered downward pressures.
Thus ended a long period of strength of Spain's currency during which the Bank of Spain had to intervene in foreign exchange markets as a counter-measure, thus accumulating a high volume of foreign reserves.
In addition, the differential in yield between Spanish 10-year bonds and their German equivalent, which on January 28 had reached an all-time low of close to 0.80 percentage points, on February 18 had increased to 1.26 points.
What is curious is that speculation over the exclusion of the "Club Med" from the leading group of the monetary union coincides with a substantial advance in these countries in convergence terms.
Italian inflation, for example, went from a rate of 5.7% in November 1995 to 2.6% one year later.
Its long-term interest rates also have shown a substantial drop (from 13.3% at the beginning of 1995 to 7.0% in February 1996).
Government deficit stood at 6.6% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 1996, a long way from the 3% limit set at Maastricht but also far removed from levels close to 10% recorded up until 1994.
Furthermore, the special budget which the Prodi government plans to put into practice this year could bring the final deficit down to almost the convergence level.
With regard to the public debt (123.4% of GDP), this is twice the Maastricht reference limit but in any case is lower than that of Belgium, one of the supposedly virtuous countries whose cumulative debt totals 130.6% of the GDP.
Spain has also taken a major step on the road to convergence.
February brought publication of the January consumer price index showing a year-to-year rate which for the first time since the Sixties stood below 3%.
This was a transcendental achievement if we take into account the traditional inflationary component usually attributed to Spain's economy.
Also that month, figures were made known for budget implementation in 1996 which, according to the Ministry of Economy, made it possible to meet the objective of a total deficit in the public sector of 4.4% of the GDP in 1996.
It is true, however, that if we look at cash criteria (revenue and collections without accrual) the government deficit shot up for various reasons so that total central government debt went from 65.3% of the GDP in 1995 to 69.3% in 1996, thus going far beyond the 60% limit laid down at Maastricht.
In addition, it should be remembered that Spain now meets the interest rate criteria and that the criteria regarding foreign exchange rates may be met in March, given that this would complete the period of two years since the last devaluation of the peseta within the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.

On the other hand, the hub and anchor of the future single currency (Germany) is having problems in meeting some of the convergence criteria, especially that relating to the public debt (60.8% of GDP in 1996) and the government deficit (4.0% of GDP in the same year).
In the case of the government deficit, the most important criteria for moving into the single currency, major fears have arisen that this may not be met in 1997, the year to be taken as reference for deciding which countries will form the first group.
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, itself expressed doubts in this respect in its January report.
If Germany fails to meet the criteria it would be difficult to exclude other countries which do not meet them if the date for launching the euro on January 1, 1999 is to be maintained and the date not postponed.
One of the causes bringing about Germany's difficulties is the low rate of economic growth.
In the fourth quarter of 1996, the German GDP fell slightly whereas months earlier it was expected that in this period the signs of recovery which had appeared in mid-year would become stronger.
But the most important factor has undoubtedly been the unemployment figure for January.
The unemployment rate that month rose to 11.3% as against 10.1% in the same month of 1996.
In spite of the various extenuating circumstances (weather, drop in construction) the truth is that the figures do not lie and it has been noted that these are the worst results since the time Adolf Hitler came to power.
The poor economic figures, combined with the blockage of fiscal and social security reform, have spurred rumours about the possible resignation of Chancellor Kohl whose 14 years at the head of the German government have left a unique character not only on German politics but also have put a special stamp on the development of European integration.
In sharp contrast to the situation in Germany, or in Europe in general, the U.S. economy continues to enjoy excellent health.
Growth remains well above 2% without any sign of lagging in spite of the long expansionist cycle which began in the second quarter of 1991.
Job creation continues at a good rate so that the unemployment rate (5.4%) is less than half of that in Germany.
Inflation remains totally under control in spite of the growth in employment and wages.
Interest rates are stable even with some increases brought about by fears that the Federal Reserve Board, the central bank system in the United States, may raise reference rates in order to dissipate any inkling of inflation.
In view of the U.S. economic situation and with the seasoning of rumours about the future of the Economic and Monetary Union in Europe it is not at all strange that the dollar has strengthened extraordinarily in recent weeks.
For some months we have been noting a veiled tendency of the dollar to appreciate against the Japanese yen and the deutschemark.
But since January, the exchange rate of the green bill has shot up.
From a low of 118.5 pesetas in July 1995 it came to exceed 144 pesetas in February.
The rise of the dollar is positive to the extent that it may help to raise the economic drive in Europe and Japan, although on the other hand it means an increase in the price of raw materials which are priced in dollars (particularly oil) and thus it constitutes an inflationary risk.
In any case, the summit of the G-7, the club of the world's most powerful countries, held in Berlin on the second weekend of February, gave its approval to the appreciation of the dollar.
The growth of the U.S. economy is in contrast to the stagnation in Europe and, on this side of the Atlantic, is emulated only by the United Kingdom, some of the Nordic countries and Spain.
Spain's economy, in fact, is recording relatively high growth rates as shown in the latest quarterly report of the Bank of Spain which estimates growth of 2.5% in the final quarter of 1996.
In any case, it is no secret that growth in 1996 was below that expected.
In the absence of the first estimates of the National Institute of Statistics which will be published on March 5, both the Bank of Spain and the Ministry of Economy have indicated GDP growth of 2.2%-2.3% for last year.
It should be remembered that the initial target was 3.4% and that at the beginning of the year analysts believed it would be possible to reach 3%.
It should be pointed out, however, that whereas in 1995 the profile of economic activity was downward, in 1996 the tendency was progressively upward.
One of the reasons for moderation in the growth rate is the weakness shown in consumption in spite of its growth profile.
The decisive factor in this performance is the moderate growth in household incomes as noted by the Bank of Spain in its report.
In fact, in 1996 employment grew strongly (the Ministry of Economy estimates a rise of 190,000 jobs while other indicators put an even higher figure) and the same happened with retirement pensions.
On the other hand, the low pay of new jobs and the decrease in unemployment benefits along with the effect of the decrease in interest rates diminished the growth in household incomes.
Prospects for this year are positive and in this respect we should underline the optimistic note shown by the earliest available indicators for January.
Passenger car sales that month rose by a spectacular 22%, the consumer confidence indicator recovered notably, bank and savings bank loans increased and employment continued its upward path.
One factor which perhaps may have a temporary effect but which had a big impact on economic life in February was the road transport strike.
Starting at the beginning of the month and ending on February 20, the strike brought about supply problems in markets and industry.
The blockage of highways was heaviest in the north of Spain and the sectors most affected were milk, livestock and the motor vehicle industry in which a number of plants had to hold up production because of lack of basic supplies.
The Spanish stock market has shown an excellent performance.
On January 21 it reached an all-time high although in February nervousness about the monetary union brought a cut in gains.
The Spanish stock market undoubtedly is helped by Wall Street, which has continued to break all-time records, but is also operating as if anticipating a favourable trend over the medium term.
Prospects of interest rate decreases have cooled off but there is still confidence in favourable results in inflation and the government deficit which would consolidate Spain's candidature for the first group to move into the euro.
February 24, 1997.

KEY FIGURES FOR SPANISH ECONOMY 

MACROECONOMIC FIGURES 

Table

Private consumption .


Public consumption .


Investment .


Exports of goods and services .


Imports of goods and services .


GVA Agriculture and fisheries .


GVA Industry .


GVA Construction .


GVA Services .


Gross domestic product .


LABOUR MARKET 

Table

Employment .


Unemployment .


Differential with EU .


PRICES AND WAGES 

Table

Consumer price index.


Differential with EU .


Wages .


FOREIGN SECTOR 

Table

Exports .


Imports .


Current account and capital account .


Financial account .


Central foreign reserves .


PUBLIC SECTOR 

Table

Government revenues .


Government spending .


Treasury deficit .


FINANCIAL SECTOR 

Table

Liquid assets held by public .


Domestic credit to private sector .


Index of Spanish stock exchanges .


INTEREST RATES 

Table

Bank of Spain intervention .


3-month interbank rate .


Differential with EU .


Treasury bills (1-year, marginal) .


10-year government bonds .


Savings bank mortgage loan .


EXCHANGE RATES 

Table

Pesetas/US .


Pesetas/deutschemark .


Notes 

- Percentage change over the same period year before.
- GVA = Gross value added. 
- Percentage of unemployed over total labour force.
- Change during period in billion pesetas.
- Excluding central foreign reserves.
- Percentage annual change in IBEX-35 index at end of period. 
- Average of daily exchange rates.

CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY 

January:Royal Decree Law 12/1995 dated December 28, 1995 on urgent measures of a budgetary, taxation and financial nature (BOE 30-12-95) which prorogued the 1995 government budget in the absence of an approved 1996 budget.

Law to Regulate Retail Trade (Law 7/1996 dated January 15, 1996) and complementary Fundamental Law 2/1996 of same date published in "Boletín Oficial del Estado".

The Federal Open Market Committee of U.S. Federal Reserve lowers discount rate and Federal Funds rate by a quarter-point to 5.0% and 5.25% respectively.

March: General elections to Spanish parliament.

April: Peseta marks up all-time high of 82.864 pesetas against deutschemark since October 10, 1994.

June: Official government bulletin (BOE) publishes Royal Decrees 5, 6, 7 and 8/1996 on economic liberalization and fiscal measures.

July: Coming into force of Royal Decree 12/1996, dated July 26, providing for special credits to meet obligations from previous years and regularize advances of funds and increasing special taxes on tobacco and alcohol (BOE 30-7-96).

August: Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, lowers interest rates on repose to 3.00% from earlier 3.3% maintained since February.

October: Government and unions sign agreement on public pension system up to year 2000 soon to be incorporated in parliamentary bill.

November: Italian lira rejoins exchange rate mechanism of EMS after more than four years of absence.

January: New legal framework for financing of Autonomous Communities comes into force in Spain-Organic Law 3/1996 dated December 27, 1996 (BOE 28-12-96), modifying Organic Law 8/1980, and Law 14/1996 dated December 30, 1996 (BOE 31-12-96) relating to transfer of central government taxation to Autonomous Communities and complementary fiscal measures.

February: Government approves broad programme of measures aimed at encouraging and liberalizing the economy.

March:IBEX-35 index for Spanish stock market reached all-time high closing at 5,620.74.

Dow Jones industrial average for New York stock exchange reached all-time high of 7,085.16 points.

El Banco de España baja el tipo de interés de la subasta decenal de activos, del 6% al 5.75%. 

FORECASTS 

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY 

Table

Gross domestic product.


United States .


Japan .


European Union .


Consumer prices.


United States .


Japan .


European Union .


SPAIN 

Table

Date of forecast .


Macroeconomic figures.


National private consumption .


Public consumption .


Gross fixed capital consumption .


National demand .


Exports of goods and services .


Imports of goods and services .


Gross domestic product .


Other indicators 

Table

Private consumption deflator .


Employment .


Current operations balance (% of GDP) .


Public deficit (% of GDP) .


MIN: Ministry of Economy and Finance; OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; IMF: International Monetary Fund; INE: National Institute of Statistics; EU: European Union; "la Caixa": Research Department of Caja de Ahorros y Pensiones de Barcelona.

CALENDAR 

March 

Table

Balance of central foreign reserves (February). .


Quarterly national accounts (4th quarter). .


Consumer price index (February).


10-day Bank of Spain auction.


Retail trade situation (January).


Industrial production index (January).


10-day Bank of Spain auction.


April 

Table

Labour force survey (December).


10-day Bank of Spain auction. .


Producer price index (February). .


Balance of central foreign reserves (March).


Wage survey (4th quarter).


Consumer price index (March).


Retail trade situation (February).


Industrial production index (February).


Labour force survey (January).


INTERNATIONAL REVIEW 

Concern about German economic figures 

The United States grew at an annual rate of 4.7% in the final quarter of last year.
With this figure, 1996 growth comes to 2.4% as against 2% the year before.
January indicators, such as the purchasing managers index, new housing construction and the industrial production index point to maintenance of the strength of the U.S. economy in the early stages of this year.
In Europe, the German economy is having difficulty in improving last year's poor growth (1.4%).
France and Italy ended 1996 with growth of 1.1% and 0.8% respectively.
The weakness of consumption is a common characteristic of all three countries along with the fiscal readjustments needed to reduce the government deficit which is producing social conflict.
Nevertheless, in France surveys on the industrial climate and consumer confidence indicate a notable improvement.
In Italy however the situation is more uncertain.
The United Kingdom on the other hand is recording greater economic activity and maintaining a path parallel to that of the United States.
In labour markets the U.S. unemployment rate continues at levels which may be considered full employment in spite of the fact that there are no wage pressures putting the inflation rate in danger.
In January, unemployment affected 5.4% of the labour force.
In Europe, the situation is quite different.
The EU unemployment rate is 10.8%, twice that of the U.S. and regional differences are notable.
Thus, while Spain's rate is above 21% and is dropping very slowly, in the United Kingdom the rate was 6.5% in January, the lowest figure in the last six years.

The labour situation in Germany deserves special mention as the unemployment rate there reached 11.3% of the labour force in January in seasonally-adjusted figures and continues to rise.
This figure has affected prospects in financial markets as it puts in danger the government deficit criterion under the Treaty of Maastricht given that it points to a sharp increase in unemployment benefits.
In absolute figures, the number of unemployed is the highest since 1933.
In general inflation continues under control in the United States, Japan and Europe.
The convergence of prices has increased on the Old Continent and the most inflationary countries are recording lower and lower rates.
Thus in January prices rose by 6.8% in Greece at year-to-year rate while in Portugal the rate was 3.3% and 2.9% in Spain.
In Germany on the other hand the rate went from 1.4% in December to 1.8% in January, a big jump which has brought added concern to Germany's economic authorities and financial markets.
In addition, oil prices have begun to drop in crude markets but the prices of raw materials, especially food raw materials, have risen although they have not yet reached levels of one year ago.
In foreign trade the sharp drop in Japan's current account balance was notable.
The surplus fell by 31% in 1996 to reach 7,200 billion yen, the lowest level since 1990.
In spite of having increased its exports by 8.2% last year, thanks to the weakness of the yen imports rose relatively more (23.4%) due partly to the dislocation of Japanese industry in the earlier period when the yen was strong.

Convergence of European interest rates slows 

Short-term rates have remained stable since the beginning of the year in the United States, Japan and Central European markets while in peripheral European countries rates have gradually eased downward.
The open market committee of the Federal Reserve Board maintained rates unchanged at its meeting on February 5.
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, also decided to maintain its rates unchanged.
In Europe, mention should be made of the correction introduced by the Bank of Italy on January 21 to its main reference rates which were cut by 0.75 percentage points putting the discount rate at 6.75% and the Lombard rate at 8.25%.
In any case, this cut did not affect the level of interbank rates in Italy which had already anticipated this decrease.
The Bank of France, in turn, has continued to apply its policy of minor cuts and on January 30 lowered its intervention rate by five hundredths to 3.10%.
On the other hand, the rise in inflation in Britain (up to 2.8% in January) has raised prospects of an increase in official interest rates but the proximity of the May elections could delay a decision in this direction by the Bank of England which requires the blessing of the Chancellor of the Exchequer in order to make a decision.
With regard to long-term rates, the yield on U.S. 10-year bonds in January ran within stable margins (between 6.5% and 6.6%), slightly above the levels of the two previous months.
In February, rates slid down toward the 6.3% level.
The yield on German 10-year bonds also went down to 5.5% hitting an all-time low with a differential favourable to U.S. bonds which has widened since mid-January to exceed eight decimals of a point in February.
In other European bond markets following the Davos economic forum at the end of January there has been much speculation about which countries will form the single currency right from the beginning, a scenario which will probably be repeated in Europe until Spring of next year.
This brought temporary pressures on rates in the peripheral countries which have put a brake on the convergence trend with German rates with slight rises.

Sharp appreciation of dollar continues 

Since the beginning of the year prospects of an increase in U.S. interest rates have brought increased demand for dollars in international foreign exchange markets which has generated an increase in the dollar exchange rate against the main currencies.
Thus January ended with an exchange rate against the deutschemark of 1.64 units to the dollar as against 1.54 units at the beginning of the month.
In addition, Japan's monetary authorities also approved the rise of the dollar which moved from an average exchange rate of 113.8 yen in mid-December to 117.9 yen in January.
Indicators for the U.S. economy published later have continued to confirm the good situation with a high level of employment.
As a result, the dollar continued to rise in February coinciding with the speculation mentioned earlier about which countries would form part of Europe's single currency right from the start and publication of adverse indicators on the German economy.
The dollar has also gained from this situation appreciating against the D-mark and the European currencies in its area of influence.
The conclusions of the latest meeting of the G-7 (the world's seven most industrialized countries) on February 9 regarding the acceptable level reached in the dollar exchange rate momentarily halted the appreciation of the U.S. currency.
In subsequent days however the dollar resumed its climb.
In mid-February the green bill was changing at 1.70 D-marks to the dollar and 124.4 yen, the latter being a level which the Japanese authorities consider excessive.
In Europe, mention should be made of the pressures unleashed on the Italian lira as a result of speculation about its participation in the single currency in 1999.
As a result of this speculation the peseta was also subject to downward pressure against the D-mark.
The pound sterling on the contrary continued to appreciate following a path parallel to the dollar.

No end to upward stock market cycle 

In the first three weeks of January the New York stock exchange maintained a strong upward trend which put the Dow Jones industrial index at a new all-time high on January 20.
This upward move was halted in subsequent days because of profit-taking while at the same time investors moderated their upward expectations to the extent that the meeting of the Federal Reserve Board drew near.
On European stock exchanges the upward drive in New York made itself felt but prices continued to rise up to the end of the month so that the indices of the main stock exchanges broke all-time records.
The discordant note again came from the Tokyo stock exchange whose Nikkei-225 index dropped 5.3% in January.
Measures to decontrol the financial system, the announcement by a classification agency of a reduction in the rating of four financial institutions of medium size and the lukewarm reception given the government measures to reduce the government deficit kept the atmosphere among investors rather cold.
In February caution was the dominant note among investors until the maintenance of official rates by the Federal Reserve Board was confirmed.
Later on, the Dow Jones index went over the 7,000 points level to close on February 18 at 7,067.46, a new all-time high.
European stock markets also continued to maintain an upward period in February.
In the 13 sessions held since the beginning of the month up to February 18 the Frankfurt DAX index recorded 12 all-time highs.
Contributing to this were the unfavourable figure on the German economy which put off any prospect of an increase in interest rates.
In the City in London the maintenance of official interest rates and especially the influence of the New York stock exchange (which was sharper than on the Continent) brought increases in the indices.
Other major markets such as Paris, Amsterdam and Zurich also moved up.
Tokyo again was sluggish and the Nikkei-225 held around 18,400 points.

EUROPEAN CONVERGENCE IN 1996 

In 1996 there was continued progress in meeting the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty on European Union.
If we look at figures for the past year we can deduce that the biggest difficulties in meeting the criteria are those relating to the good ordering of the public finances.
Nevertheless, compared with the year before 13 countries have improved the ratio of the government deficit to the gross domestic product (GDP) and only in one country (Germany) has this grown worse.

The remaining country (Luxembourg) continued to show a surplus in its public accounts and is the only country to strictly meet all criteria.
The total gross public debt in relation to the GDP was held below the required 60% in only three countries and worsened in eight countries.
In any case, it should be remembered that the Treaty does not demand strict adherence to this level of debt but also places value on the fact that "the ratio is sufficiently diminishing and approaching the reference value at a satisfactory pace".
The criterion on long-term interest rates, contrary to the previous case, is where a higher degree of convergence has been reached given that in 1996 eleven countries complied.
At the beginning of this year Greece was the only country failing to comply with regard to current interest rates.
So far as inflation rate is concerned, the report on convergence in 1996 presented by the European Commission recognized at least six different ways of calculating it, according to what is laid down in the treaty text.
Using the criterion adopted by the European Monetary Institute, the embryo European Central Bank, in its first report on the state of convergence indicated that ten countries met the criterion in 1996.
Finally, although only seven countries strictly complied with foreign exchange stability the situation continues to improve.
Since January 1997 the Austrian schilling has met the criterion and as of March Spain and Portugal will also meet it.

REAL ECONOMIC INDICATORS 

Industrial production 

Table

United States .


Japan .


Germany .


France .


Italy .


United Kingdom .


Spain .


EU.


OECD .


Unemployment rate 

Table

United States .


Japan .


Germany .


France .


Italy .


United Kingdom .


Spain .


EU .


OECD .


Consumer prices 

Table

United States .


Japan .


Germany .


France .


Italy .


United Kingdom .


Spain .


EU .


OECD .


Trade balance 

Table

United States .


Japan.


Germany .


France .


Italy .


United Kingdom .


Spain .


EU .


OECD .


NOTES 

- Provisional. 
- Annual change as percentage. 
- Billion dollars monthly. 
- Imports c.i.f., exports f.o.b. 
- Seasonally adjusted, except latest figures. 
- Percentage of labour force. 
- EU and OECD figures at standardized rates. 

SOURCE: OECD, "The Economist", National Institute of Statistics, Customs Branch and internal figures.

INTEREST RATES IN NATIONAL MARKETS (Annual percentage) 

Interbank (3-months) 

Table

10-year government bonds 

Table

SOURCE: Bank of Spain, "Financial Times" and internal figures.

SPOT EXCHANGE RATES VIS-À-VIS THE U.S. DOLLAR (National currency units per U.S. dollar, on average). 

Table

INDICES OF MAIN WORLD STOCK EXCHANGES. 

Nikkei-225; London: Financial Times-100; Frankfurt: DAX; Paris: CAC 40; Amsterdam: Ttl.
Rtn.
Gen.
Zurich: Swiss Bank Corporation Industrial; Milan: Banca Commerciale Italiana; Madrid: IBEX-35 for Spanish stock exchanges.

SOURCE: "Financial Times" and internal figures.

MEETING OF CONVERGENCE CRITERIA IN 1996 

Table

NOTAS 

- Average annual change in CPI: maximum 1.5 points above average of three best-placed countries. 
- Figure: Provisional harmonized CPI for first nine months of 1996. 
- Maximum of two points above the average of three best-placed countries. 
- Country's currency must not have modified its central parity in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System in the past two years. 

SOURCE: European Monetary Institute and internal figures.

SPAIN: OVERALL ANALYSIS 

ECONOMIC ACTIVITY 

Increased growth in fourth quarter of 1996 

According to the Bank of Spain, in the final quarter of 1996 the gross national product (GDP) showed year-to-year growth of 2.5%.
Overall growth of this heading for the year stood at around 2.2%.
Among the components of national demand, in 1996 there was a clear recovery of private consumption which in real terms grew by around 2% and a sharp drop in investment in fixed capital.
The latter decrease was due to the contractile performance in construction spending.
On the other hand, investment in capital goods maintained a very favourable course throughout the year with average annual growth estimated at 7%.
Factors favouring this performance included the rise in foreign demand, the improvement in private consumption, decreases in interest rates during the year, the improved equity position of companies and the positive trend in profit ratios.
With regard to foreign sector, mention should be made of the strong drive in exports whose average real growth for the year was above the 8.2% recorded in 1995.
On the other hand, imports recorded a more moderate growth rate clearly below the 8.8% for the year before.
The net contribution of foreign demand to GDP growth was thus positive both in the final quarter and for 1996 as a whole.
Primary production recorded notable growth in 1996.
The improved weather conditions brought a considerable increase in farm incomes while advances in livestock and fishing were more moderate.
The overall contribution of the primary sector to annual GDP growth was around a half percentage point.

Of course, at the beginning of 1997 farm production would have been affected by the recent storms to an extent still difficult to determine.
In the industrial sector, the moderate recovery noted in recent months was confirmed in the final quarter of 1996.
From October to December the industrial production index increased by 2.0% compared with the same period the year before although it is true that, taking in account the differences in working calendar for both years, the growth trend came to practically zero.
In the overall calculation for the year the sharp growth in the metalworking industries was notable due to the strength of shipbuilding and in machine building and motor vehicle production.
With regard to construction, the adverse weather conditions in the final third of 1996 changed the upward profile maintained in the immediately preceding months.
For the year as a whole, initial figures indicate an overall drop with quite different performances in housing (in which real growth may have exceeded 5%) and public works with a drop of 10%.
Prospects for 1997 are not very promising if we look at early indicators available.
In the final quarter cement consumption fell by 5.6% and new housing development is on the downswing although with a tendency to holding up in recent months.

On the other hand, the improvement in government tendering in the final stages of 1996 may suggest a more expansionist performance of spending in this segment over the present year so long as budget restrictions or possible delays in planned new funding formulas do not get in the way.
In services, the increase in certain activities linked to transportation and communications has moderated in recent months.
On the other hand, the more expansionist performance in consumption has favoured wholesale and retail trade.
In any case, the improvement stayed within the non-food components.
According to the survey by the National Institute of Statistics (INE) from October to December, sales indices for articles of personal use and for the home showed year-to-year growth of 5.3% and 4.3% respectively.
On the other hand, food sales dropped by nearly 3% in the same period.
The very slow increase in consumption was also reflected in the slight recovery of household spending which in the final quarter of 1996, breaking with the earlier contractile tone, grew by a modest 0.5% compared with the same months of the year before.
Also in this case there was greater weakness in food consumption (which dropped by 1.5%) in contrast to the moderate growth (1.2%) in other spending.

Motor vehicle sales continued to show the clearest signs of recovery and grew by 22% in January.
In addition, it seems that in the early months of 1997 investment is continuing to show very strong.
The most recent figure relating to commercial vehicle registrations in January shows the persistence of a high year-to-year growth rate (close to 20%).

GOVERNMENT TENDERS ACCEPTED: RECOVERY IN RECENT MONTHS 

In 1996, government tenders accepted (bids on public works let out to tender which have been approved) in nominal terms rose by slightly more than 19%.
Results were very mixed over the course of the year.
The early months saw a sharp contraction.
Overall, the volume approved in the first half stood at a very low level (22% below that for the year before).
In the second half the picture changed radically and, thanks to the notable thrust in the final months of the year (in the final quarter the amount approved was double that for 1995), the year ended showing an increase.
By type of public works, growth was wholly sustained by civil works which showed an annual increase of 27% while building dropped by nearly 2%.
In relative terms, the biggest increase (185%) came in railway works, including among other things the programmes for the Madrid-Barcelona AVE fast train, the Mediterranean corridor; subway extensions, etc.
In money terms, the biggest heading continued to be roads (nearly one third of the total approved) which showed an increase of 17.5%.
Overall, the amount relating to transportation was nearly 800 billion pesetas, close to half the total From another perspective, regional and municipal government tenders accepted continued to grow at a strong rate.
Figures for Autonomous Communities showed growth of nearly 27%.
The share of tenders accepted at this level of government as a percentage of the total (38%) nearly caught up with the central government share (41%).
In relative terms however the greatest strength showed up in municipalities which awarded works for a value exceeding the total for the year before by 40%.
As counterpart to the previous balance, we should point out the risk that, in the context of expected budgetary restrictions, 1997 may not bring the optimum rate of completion of works approved, especially if new formulas anticipated for financing infrastructures are not brought into play over the short term.

TOURISM: NOTABLE GROWTH IN 1996 

The results of the 1996 tourist balance were very satisfactory overall.
The number of visitors rose by nearly 6% compared with the year before, contributing nominal inflows which, according to early calculations, were 10.7% above those in 1995.
If we take into account that the heading tourism and restaurant and hotel trade in the consumer price index recorded a rise of 3.8% (two decimals above the general index) the growth of inflows in real terms would be approximately 7%.
Without prejudice to the above, the trend in hotel demand remained somewhat stagnant over the course of the year which was reflected in a slight decrease (0.3%) in total daily hotel accommodation recorded.
This, together with the slight increase in the number of rooms available, accounts for the fact that the occupancy rate (60.7% up to September ) dropped by more than one percentage point compared with the same period the year before.
In spite of everything, staff employed in these establishments recorded a moderate increase (0.5%).
From another point of view, the results of monthly statistics on tourist movements at border points (FRONTUR) showed interesting figures on the basic characteristics of incoming tourism.

Around 67% of all foreign visitors (more than 40 million) may be classified as tourists (with stays of at least one night).
The other visitors return the same day to where they come from or use Spain as a means of going to Portugal or countries of African continent.
The greater part of tourist arrivals (45%) are recorded in the summer season and the two middle months of the year account for one third of all arrivals for the year.
Another basic characteristic of Spain's tourist sector is its concentration, both in terms of destination (Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, Andalusia, Catalonia and Valencian Community receive nearly 90% of tourists in the season) and in terms of origin (nearly 70% of tourists come from four countries (the United Kingdom, Germany, France and Italy).
In addition, the two means most used by tourists to come to Spain were air (63%) and road (32%).
Holidays was the reason most commonly mentioned by visitors (in 92% of cases) who furthermore in most cases organized their stay in Spain ahead of time.

ECONOMIC ACTIVITY INDICATORS (Percentage cumulative change over same period year before) 

Table

Industry.


Value added .


Employment .


Electricity consumption .


Industrial production index .


Order books .


Utilization of production capacity .


Imports of non-energy intermediate goods .


Construction.


Value added .


Employment .


Cement consumption .


Housing starts .


Housing completions .


Government tenders .


Services.


Value added .


Employment .


Retail trade index .


Daily hotel accommodation .


Tourist revenues .


Rail passengers (km) .


Rail freight (km) .


Air passengers .


Diesel oil consumption .


Companies Turnover .


Profit (before depreciation and provisions) .


Temporary receiverships (total assets) .


Businesses started .


Commercial credit .


Consumption.


Private consumption demand .


Consumer goods production .


Household spending .


Consumer goods imports.


Car sales .


Petrol consumption .


Consumer credit .


Total employment .


Wages .


Investment.


Investment demand in capital goods .


Capital goods production .


Capital goods imports .


Commercial vehicle registrations .


NOTES: 

- Business survey: difference between percentage of positive and negative replies. Annual average. 

- Business survey: percentage of utilization inferred from replies. Annual average.
By volume.
Average household spending in constant pesetas. 


SOURCE: UNESA, OFICEMEN, ANFAC, SEOPAN, Telefónica, National Institute of Statistics, Bank of Spain, Civil Aviation Branch, Ministry of Labour and Social Security, Secretary of State for Economy and internal figures.

FUENTES: UNESA.
INE.
OFICEMEN.
SEOPAN.
Banco de España.
Aviación Civil.
Telefónica.

Dirección General de Previsión y Coyuntura y elaboración propia.

TOURISM INDICATORS 

Table

Number of visitors .


Hotel establishments.


Space available.


Number of spaces .


Occupancy rate (% over total available) .


Staff employed .


Daily hotel stays (*).


Spanish residents .


Foreigners .


Total .


Origin of travellers (**).


Spain .


Germany .


France .


United Kingdom .


Rest of Europe .


Rest of world .


Total .


Tourist balance of payments (*).


Inflows .


Outflows .


Balance .


Consumer price index (*).


Tourism and restaurant and hotel trade .


NOTES:

- The increase over same period accumulated from year before. 
- Percentage share of total hotel stays.

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics; Secretary of State for Economy; Secretary of State for Trade, Tourism and Small and Medium Companies; Bank of Spain, and internal figures.

LABOUR MARKET 

Employment shows sustained growth 

Employment began the year maintaining the favourable trends of last year.
According to the number of persons registering with Social Security in January, the number of employed rose by 2.2% with a notable increase in wage-earners, up 2.7% at year-to-year rate.
In the fourth quarter of 1996 the labour force survey carried out by the National Institute of Statistics indicated that employment consolidated its growth rate at a higher rate (3.3%) thus showing the clear recovery of employment compared with the first half-year.
In the last twelve months the survey shows the creation of some 400,000 new jobs, a figure which in any case is an overestimate because of the change in the population census base.
The recovery of employment in the fourth quarter was especially significant in construction where growth stood at a spectacular 7.7%, thus confirming a high growth profile for 1996 as a whole.
It should be kept in mind that at the beginning of the year the sector showed moderate decreases in employment.
The recovery in industrial employment was much smaller although still notable as it ended the year growing at the rate of 1.4%, thus moving well away from the stagnant situation at the beginning of the year.
Finally, employment in services continued a trend to slowdown ending the fourth quarter at 3.9%, around one percentage point less than at the peak moments of the year.
The improvement in employment in any case depended on permanent jobs rather than on temporary jobs.
Nevertheless, latest available figures would indicate some slowdown in growth of permanent jobs (still rising by 6.0%) in favour of temporary jobs for which the growth rate stood at 2.0% In parallel, there was also greater strength in full-time employment to the detriment of part-time jobs.
In any case, these figures must be interpreted with care as the figures on hiring provided by the National Employment Institute (INEM) continue to show considerable strength in temporary jobs.

Furthermore, contracts recorded by INEM (860,232 in January) again showed a spectacular rise (20.8% compared with last year).
This major increase arises largely as a result of the heavy turn-around in hiring through the use of formulas which allow very short-term hiring.

Rate of decrease in unemployment stabilizes 

The number of unemployed registered at offices of INEM rose by 40,406 in January, a figure slightly below that for the same month in 1996.
As a result, the rate of decrease in unemployment remained practically unaltered for the fourth consecutive month at the 6.8% figure recorded in October 1996 which indicated some stability in the process of reducing unemployment.
Altogether, the total number of unemployed (2,256,498) was the lowest figure in any January since 1983.
By segment, the most positive trends showed up in industry, construction and among those seeking their first job given that increases in the rate of reduction of employment could be noted in these groups.
As a result, registered unemployment in industry was down by 13.2% from the figure for January last year while in construction the decrease was 7.5%.
In the case of those seeking their first job the rate of decrease stood at 3.5%, one point and three decimals above the month before.
In services, on the other hand, there was a notable slowdown in the rate of reduction of unemployment which showed a considerable worsening in recent months.
In fact, the sharp increase in unemployment in this sector in January (37,087 persons) was similar to that in the worst years of this decade.

This put the rate of decrease of unemployment down to 4.7%, a long way from the rates recorded during the second half of 1996.
By sex, the reduction in unemployment was sharper for women than for men although the rate of female unemployment (19.2%) was eight points above the male rate.
In addition, among young people the rate of decrease in unemployment remained at a high level (11.5%) well above the rate for other ages.
Nevertheless, the youth unemployment rate (18.4%) was somewhat more than five points higher than all other ages.
Similar conclusions could be drawn from the labour force survey.

In fact, up to the fourth quarter estimated unemployment showed a rate of sustained reduction at around 2.5%, although this was below that indicated for registered unemployment.
This weaker decrease may be attributed to the sharp increase in labour force estimated by the survey (around 2% last year) because of the increased number of women in the labour market.
In this context, it is not surprising that unemployment should drop faster in the case of males rather than females and that on the contrary the unemployment rate should stand at much higher levels for the female population (29.1% in November 1996) than for the male population (17.2%).
In addition, the survey estimates youth unemployment at 41.3% which is in contrast to 17.8% for those over 25 years of age.

EMPLOYMENT INDICATORS(Percentage annual change) 

Figure

NOTES: Figures from Labour Force Survey.

SOURCE: INE, Ministry of Economy and internal figures.

REGISTERED UNEMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR, SEX, AGE AND AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITY JANUARY 1997 

By sector 

Table

Agriculture .


Industry .


Construction .


Services .


First job .


By sex 

Table

Males .


Females .


By ages 

Table

Under 25 years .


All other ages .


By Autonomous Community 

Table

Andalusia .


Aragon .


Asturias .


Balearic Islands .


Canary Islands .


Cantabria .


Castile-Leon .


Castile-La Mancha .


Catalonia .


Valencian Community .


Extremadura .


Galicia .


Madrid Community .


Murcia .


Navarre .


Basque Country .


La Rioja .


Ceuta and Melilla .


NOTES: Provisional figures.

SOURCE: National Employment Institute, National Institute of Statistics and internal figures.

PRICES 

Inflation drops below 3% 

The consumer price index (CPI) rose by 0.3% in January, three decimals below the same month last year.
As a result, the year-to-year rate stood at 2.9%, the lowest figure since 1969 and only three decimals above the target forecast for year-end.
Underlying inflation in turn dropped two decimals to stand at 2.8%.
The improvement in the January index was basically due to moderation in processed food prices which with an annual growth rate of 1.8% managed to take somewhat more than two decimals off the general index.
Maintenance of prices of tobacco and alcoholic beverages which this year were not affected by the usual rise in special taxes in January along with the drop in olive oil prices were behind the sharp drop in this component of the index.

Another key factor in the moderation of the CPI, although having less relative impact, was the performance in certain prices subject to control such as electrical power rates, telephone and gas and some fuels like butane all of which remained unchanged or even decreased.
In this respect, there was a notable decrease in housing prices (down four decimals to 3.9%) as a result of the decrease for lighting and heating.
On the other hand, we should mention the notable rise in producer prices, apart from energy, which showed growth of 2.6%, three decimals above the month before.
This rise may have been caused by the step-up effect brought about by the reduction in registration fees on certain vehicles which took place in January.
In this respect, the rise could be of an isolated nature and not indicative of a change in trend, especially when certain products under his heading, such as home goods, showed a more favourable performance in January.
The case of services was rather different with prices showing strong downward resistance and maintaining a growth rate at the same level as in previous months.
In fact, growth of prices in services, excluding rents, stood at 3.5%, thus stabilizing exactly at the figure recorded in March 1996.
In any case, the progressive decrease in the CPI is bringing about a reduction in the inflation differential with the European Union, especially when price increases in the three best-placed countries appear to be moving up slightly.
In fact, the average increase in the three countries showing least inflation in December stood at 1.1%, two decimals above the month before whereas in Spain the CPI remained unchanged at 3.2%.
This situation should have improved in January with the drop of three decimals shown in the Spanish inflation rate.

Energy puts pressure on wholesale prices 

For the third consecutive month, producer prices showed a rise in December.
As a result, the growth rate of the producer price index went to 1.8%, one percentage point above the annual low recorded in August and September (0.8%).
In any case, average growth of producer prices in 1996 was 1.7%, well below the 6.4% recorded in 1995.
The rise in producer prices in December may be attributed to the continuing upward pressure of energy prices and to a lesser extent the rise in prices of intermediate goods.

These trends were in contrast however to the good performance in prices of consumer goods and capital goods which in December reached annual lows with growth rates of 2.9% and 2.0% respectively.
Farm prices in October continued the downward tone shown in the two preceding months.
The performance in prices of imported industrial goods however was less favourable with cumulative average growth up to November showing a slight rise putting the rate at 2.8% as against 1.9% in the same period the year before.

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX 

Figure

NOTES: Provisional figures.

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics.

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX BY COMPONENT 

By type spending 

Table

Food .


Non-processed .


Processed .


Clothing .


Housing .


Household goods .


Medicine .


Transportation .


Recreational, educational .


Other expenses 

Table

By group .


Non-food products .


Industrial goods .


Total (not including energy products) .


Energy products .


Services (not including rents) .


Underlying inflation .


GENERAL INDEX 

Figure

NOTES: Provisional figures.

General index excluding energy products and non-processed foods.

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics.

INFLATION INDICATORS (Percentage change over same period year before) 

Source: National Institute of Statistics, Secretary of State for Economy and internal figures.

FOREIGN OPERATIONS 

Peseta weakens against deutschemark 

The first two months of the year brought two radically different situations in the peseta's position against the deutschemark and the currencies in the area under its strongest influence (mainly the Dutch florin and the Belgian franc).
Up to January 20 the peseta exchange rate continued a strongly appreciatory path against these currencies which was a faithful reflection of current expectations favourable to incorporation of the peseta in the single currency right from the first moment.
The position of the peseta, which began the year with an exchange rate against the deutschemark at the level of 84.29 units, forced the Bank of Spain to intervene in foreign exchange markets at the beginning of January in order to avoid greater appreciation in the peseta exchange rate.
Prospects of a decrease in current interest rates and publication of the good inflation figure continued to put pressure on the peseta exchange rate.
The drop in the Bank of Spain 10-day auction rate on January 16 did not alleviate these pressures as confidence in the Spanish currency was now restored.
Due to this factor and the end of central bank intervention in foreign exchange markets the peseta appreciated to the level of 83.26 units to the deutschemark on January 20, a level which had not been reached since May 1996.
In the final days of the month certain statements at the World Economic Forum at Davos put in doubt the ability of some countries to meet the convergence criteria in time, mainly in reference to Italy.
On top of these statements came the opinions of certain German authorities in the same vein.
All these doubts brought about a deterioration in prospects which caused the lira to depreciate.
This also affected the exchange rate of Spain's currency which depreciated up to month-end when it stood at the level of 84.64 pesetas to the deutschemark.
In February, the change in trend noted was confirmed.
The peseta continued to maintain a tendency to devalue but intervention by the Bank of Spain managed to correct the situation so that in the first three weeks of the month the average daily exchange rate has moved within a very limited range against the German currency between 84.55 and 84.86 units to the deutschemark.
Nevertheless, in the session on February 4 the exchange rate against the deutschemark reached 85.20 pesetas, above the 85.07 units established as the bilateral exchange rate in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
In terms of the other countries in the ECU basket, the peseta depreciated slightly against the lira, the escudo and the drachma (around 0.6%) while against the Irish pound the peseta lost 1.3% in value.
This was due to the drag effect the pound sterling exercises over the Irish currency.
The latter has appreciated 15.7% against the peseta in one year and went above 232.6 pesetas, the highest level since the end of July 1985.
Against the U.S. dollar the path of the peseta was different from that shown against the European currencies given that since the end of November the U.S. currency continued its meteoric upward move in foreign exchange markets around the world.
The strength of the dollar is based on the good situation of the U.S. economy which is enjoying sustained growth with full employment and a lack of inflationary pressures in a very favourable international context.
This is in contrast to the situation in Germany, Japan's desire for the yen to depreciate in order to relaunch its economy, doubts about the euro, and so on.

From an exchange rate of 130.3 pesetas at the beginning of the year the green bill went beyond the level of 144.0 pesetas on February 18 which it had not reached since January 1994.
Later on the exchange rate fell slightly.

The weakness of the peseta in foreign exchange markets has at times brought central bank intervention in order to stabilize the exchange rate at the desired level.
The strength of Spain's prospects of moving into the single currency led to appreciation of the peseta last year in spite of successive cuts in official interest rates applied by the central bank.
In order to dampen this situation up to January this year the Bank of Spain was forced to intervene in foreign exchange markets selling pesetas against foreign currency.
In February the action of the Bank of Spain was in the other direction buying foreign currency against pesetas in view of the change in prospects and pressures on Spain's currency.
As a result of central bank interventions and movements recorded in the balance of payments total central foreign currency reserves rose by 3.5 billion dollars to reach a level of 65.3 billion dollars, a figure which represents 79.6% more than in April 1995 following the last depreciation of the peseta.

SPOT RATE FOR PESETA AGAINST MAIN CURRENCIES: JANUARY 1997 

Table

US dollar .


Japanese yen.


Swiss franc .


Table

European Monetary System.


Deutschemark .


French franc .


Dutch guilder .


Belgian franc .


Danish krone .


Irish pound .


Portuguese escudo .


Italian lira .


Pound sterling.


Greek drachma.


ECU .


Austrian schilling .


Finnish mark .


Swedish crown .


NOTES: 

Bilateral fluctuation limits of the peseta in relation to EMS currencies are +16.12% to 13.88%.

Nevertheless, overall flotation of the currencies reduces these limits in terms of the strongest or weakest currency in the system.
This column expresses the percentage fluctuation in terms of bilateral parity over the total possible fluctuation, 100 being the effective maximum limit.
The sign indicates depreciation of the peseta.

Central bilateral exchange rates with the pound sterling and the drachma are notional.

The Austrian schilling and Finnish mark do not form part of ECU but do belong to exchange rate mechanism.
SOURCE: Bank of Spain and internal figures.

PUBLIC SECTOR 

Treasury deficit reaches 3,680 billion pesetas in 1996 

The 1996 central government budget year ended with an upward shift in the deficit in spite of the fact that the volume of spending was contained.
It should be remembered that in 1996 it was not possible to approve the budget so that the 1995 budget was prorogued and various corrections were introduced through corresponding legislative measures.
Non-financial government spending totalled 18,310 billion pesetas, an increase of 6.2% compared with the year before thus exceeding the figure initially forecast by 521 billion pesetas.
This major overrun may be fully attributed to spending for obligations contracted in previous years and which should have been included in the 1995 budget but were not brought into account until July 1996.
If we discount the effect of adjusting these budget shortfalls, non-financial spending stood at 17,710 billion pesetas, 2.7% more than the year before which put the increase in spending even below that forecast in the draft 1996 budget (which finally was not approved).
The relative moderation in spending must mainly be attributed to the contraction of spending for capital operations which were down 8.0% as against 7.8% growth in current spending.

Under current spending, the most expansionist headings were spending on interest, with an increase of 16.7% in spite of the decrease in interest rates, followed by staff costs and current transfers which showed increase slightly below 6%.
The rise in staff costs (5.9%) breaks down as 3.5 points for the salary increase last year, somewhat more than 1.5 points attributable to spending for previous years and the rest to salary shifts and hiring of new public servants.

Non-financial revenues (14,630 billion pesetas in 1996) rose by 3.9%, substantially below forecasts.
The budget shortage (amounting to 554.6 billion pesetas) was basically due to the lower level of tax collections coming from personal income tax and lower than expected property revenues given that both revenues from corporate tax and the main indirect taxes were slightly above forecasts.
Personal income tax collections were up by only 0.8%, more than 290 billion pesetas short of initial forecasts.
This major drop was due to the notable decrease in collections for partial payments (attributable to a reduction in calculation of income from activities subject to modules), the increase in rebates and smaller hold-backs for income on investment capital, brought about by the drop in interest rates.

With regard to property revenues, the gap amounted to 250 billion pesetas because of lower revenues from privatizations.
Collections for corporate tax on the other hand amounted to 1,370 billion pesetas, slightly above the amount initially forecast (12.7 billion pesetas) thanks to the improvement in company profits.

Along the same lines, under indirect taxes, collections for value added tax rose by 7.0%, around 25 billion pesetas more than forecast.
So far as concerns other indirect taxes, we should mention lower revenues for special tax on means of transportation (6.9%) and foreign transactions (18.4%) as against a recovery in collections for special taxes which were up 8.4% thanks, among other factors, to tax changes made last August.
As a result of the performance in non-financial spending and revenues outlined the Treasury deficit at year-end amounted to 3,683.3 billion pesetas, 16.4% more than last year and more than 1,000 billion pesetas above the figure initially budgeted for (2,610 billion pesetas).

Discounting higher spending attributable to amounts involving obligations from previous years totalling 603.3 billion pesetas, the Treasury deficit would have stood at 3,080 billion pesetas, 2.7% less than last year.
The performance of the Treasury deficit described was in contrast to the slight improvement in the central government deficit in terms of national accounting which was put at 3.3% of the GDP in 1996, two decimals below government forecasts set out in the Convergence Plan.

These differences are due to the varying criteria used to measure public imbalances given that in terms of national accounting accrual criteria are applied for revenues due and obligations committed to, and to the fact that the budget shortfalls which came to light in July are not included as well as other adjustments made.

Recourse to securities market to cover government borrowing requirement 

The central government financial deficit in 1996 (that is without including the balance at the Bank of Spain) reached a figure of 4,190 billion pesetas, 10.7% more than the year before.
This increase was below the Treasury deficit because of the lower valuation put on financial instruments - 502.8 billion pesetas.
Credits granted to Social Security and the Spanish Consortium for Export Credit Insurance were key factors in the rise in financial instruments.
The central government borrowing requirement in 1996 was largely covered through the primary securities market.
In fact, recourse to the primary securities market in 1996 provided it with nearly 5,000 billion pesetas which, as well as meeting the borrowing requirement, made it possible to increase its credit position at the Bank of Spain by nearly 1,000 billion pesetas.

GOVERNMENT NON-FINANCIAL SPENDING: BUDGET OVERRUNS, 1996 

- Real spending 
- Overrun above base budget
- Base Billion 
- Current operations
- Wages and salaries 
- Purchases of goods and services 
- Interest payments 
- Current transfers 
- Capital operations
- Investment 
- Capital transfers 

NOTES: 

The base budget is the result of changes and corrections made to the prorogued 1995 budget given that in 1996 no new budget was approved.
SOURCE: Ministry of Economy and Finance and internal figures.

GOVERNMENT NON-FINANCIAL REVENUES: BUDGET SHORTAGES 1996 

- Real revenues 
- Shortage on base budget
- Base Billion 
- Direct taxes
- Personal income tax 
- Corporate income tax 
- Other 
- Total 
- Indirect taxes
- VAT 
- Special taxes 
- Customs 
- Other 
- Total 
- Property revenues 
- Other non-financial revenues 
- Treasury deficit 

NOTES: 

The base budget is the result of changes and corrections made to the prorogued 1995 budget in accordance with that set out in the Economic and Financial Report of the Central Government Budget for 1997.

SOURCE: Ministry of Economy and Finance and internal figures.

GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL OPERATIONS (Cumulative at end of period in billion pesetas) 

Figure

Economy and Finance and internal figures.

MONETARY TRENDS 

Prospects of interest rate cut cool in February 

The downward path of both short-term and long-term interest rates came to a halt toward the end of January in an atmosphere of doubt about the incorporation of the peseta in the first group of countries moving into the single currency or euro in 1999 because of various statements.
As a result, interest rates generally rose to some extent except for the short-term.
Once confidence was gradually re-established along with the help of the good figure for inflation in January, which was down below the 3% level, yields tended to return to the low levels reached in January.
Nevertheless, the lack of confidence did not altogether disappear and the third week of February brought an increase in short-term interest rates in an atmosphere of a weakening peseta.
Up to the second ten-day period of February the Bank of Spain maintained its basic intervention rate unchanged at 6.0% in a context of some foreign exchange pressure.

Interest rates on interbank deposits rose slightly for the reasons mentioned above.
Toward mid-February the 3-month yield again recorded an all-time low (5.75%) although long-term rates went to a level somewhat above the lows recorded in January.
Nevertheless, in the third week of February interbank deposit rates rose substantially with the 3-month rate coming close to 6%.

The cooling off of downward prospects on interest rates meant that after the notable decreases in January the downward trend in yields on Treasury bills begun around mid-1995 came to an end.
Thus, while the marginal yield of 6-month Treasury bills was repeated, the marginal rate on 1-year instruments rose in two close steps to reach 5.32%, some 0.26 points above the January low although this was a drop of 3.09 points compared with twelve months earlier.
In spite of the rise on medium and long-term government bond rates in the secondary market, in the final 10-day period of January the Treasury was able to reduce marginal yields on government bonds by a modest amount at auctions early in February.
Later on, thanks to the favourable performance of German bonds, yields on 10-year bonds returned to a low level of around 6.7%.
Bank interest rates continued to converge with European rates in January under the effect of the central bank cut at mid-month.
As a result interest rates on a good number of products continued to show all-time lows.

In the third week of February the interest rate curve, that is the yield-term structure, had the form shown in the accompanying graph.
A levelling off in the curve compared with one month before may be noted.
This indicates a moderation in downward prospects on official interest rates compared with those in January.

Nevertheless, a drop of 0.75 points in these rates is still expected over the remainder of the year.

Monetary policy: waiting for a better moment 

In spite of the reduction in inflation in January, the Bank of Spain did not change its reference rate leaving it at the 6.0% set on January 16.
Certain pressures on the peseta and concern about the trend in energy and services led the central bank to take a cautious stand.

One financial indicator which also pointed to a prudent position was the interest rate differential with German 10-year bonds.
As a result of doubts about Spain's entry in the Economic and Monetary Union with the first group of countries this differential widened to exceed one point after having gone to a low of 0.8 points.
With regard to monetary and credit figures, key indicators in the Bank of Spain's monitoring system, liquid assets held by the public held to a year-to-year growth rate of 6.5%, below the 7% growth target established.
Nevertheless, the January increase is downwardly biased because of the effect of the shift from bank deposits to holdings in investment funds.
On the other hand, domestic credit to companies and households rose in the first month of the year putting the year-to-year change rate at 8.9%.

INTEREST RATES (Monthly average as percentage) 

Table

NOTES: 

- Provisional figures.
- February 24 for Mibor and government bonds.
- Average weighted issue interest rate.
- Secondary market. 
- Outright spot operations.

SOURCE: Bank of Spain, "Financial Times" and internal figures.

Autonomous factors in the creation of base liquidity showed an expansionist trend in January due mainly to the foreign sector with the result that liquidity needs of the financial system decreased.
As a result, net injection of funds by the central bank dropped from 4,300 billion pesetas as a daily average in December to 3,800 billion pesetas in January.

MONETARY SITUATION INDICATORS 

Figure

NOTES: 

- Percentage change over one year earlier. 
- Total wages.
- Quarterly figures for non-financial companies from Bank of Spain's composite company statistics. Arithmetical average of year-to-year rates by quarter. 

- Constant prices base 1986.
- To calculate the differential both interest rates at annual rate on basis of 365 days. 

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics, Bank of Spain and internal figures.

MONETARY MARKET 

Increased yield on Treasury bills in February 

The cooling off of downward prospects on interest rates as a result of doubts about Spain's being among the first group of countries to set the single currency in motion in 1999 was the reason behind the end of the downward move in yields on Treasury bills.
As a result, following sizeable cuts in January, at the February auctions there were two successive increases in yields on 1-year Treasury bills and a rise in 6-month instruments for the first time since these again began to be issued in September 1996.
In a context of upsets in monetary markets, at the final auction in January and at February auctions 6-month Treasury bills demand was modest.
The Treasury repeated the yield of 5.342% in the former case but raised the yield very slightly to 5.351% in the first February auction for technical reasons as this issue involved one day less than normal.
At the second auction in February the Treasury increased the marginal yield by two decimals to 5.551% thus setting a differential of two decimals with interbank deposits for the same term.
At the first auction of 1-year Treasury bills in February, the total applied for was very small and the Treasury raised the marginal interest rate by 0.12 points to 5.172%.
At the next auction demand had not recovered and covered only 73.5% of maturities of the same date.
The Treasury raised the marginal rate by 0.14 points to 5.32%, which however represented a drop of 3.09 points compared with twelve months earlier.
We should mention the relatively broad differential between yields on 1-year Treasury bills and interbank deposits for the same term which rose to 0.3 points.
Total Treasury bills in circulation amounted to 13,070 billion pesetas at the end of February.
This figure represented a drop of 330.2 billion pesetas compared with the end of 1996.

Rise in interbank rates 

After recording all-time lows for all terms following the Bank of Spain cut in the official interest rate on January 16, lack of confidence in Spain's entering the Economic and Monetary Union with the first group brought pressures in the interbank deposit market on terms longer than three months.
Overnight yields swung at around 6% following the cut in the basic intervention rate in January.
In the second ten-day period of February however overnight yields rose substantially above this level as a result of pressures on liquidity due partly to the fact that at the corresponding 10-day auction some 44% of the total applied for was not granted on asking a lower rate as the central bank decided to maintain the reference rate at the same 6% level.
In addition, 3-month rates rose slightly in the final ten days of January to reach 5.9%.
Nevertheless, once calm was re-established in the second ten days of February the 3-month yield again marked up another all-time low (5.75%), some three points below the figure one year earlier.
The persistent lack of confidence, however, brought new ups and downs which put the rate close to 6% in the third week of February thus slightly broadening the differential with Germany to 2.8 points.
Long-term interest rates in the interbank deposit market followed ups and downs similar to those in the 3-month term but they did not go to the low levels reached in January.
As a result, at the end of the third week of February the 6-month yield stood at 5.8% while the 1-year rate was at 5.6%, some 0.25 points above the lows in January.
The interest rate curve, that is the term-yield structure, has thus flattened out in recent weeks while still maintaining a downward slope.
As a result, prospects of cuts in official interest rates have cooled off and now, instead of anticipating decreases of 1.25 points during the year it is expected there will be decreases of around 0.75 points.
The average daily amount of transactions in the interbank deposit market in January was 1,900 billion pesetas.
This volume represents an increase of 2.9% compared with the same month in 1996 and is in contrast to the drop recorded the month before.

TREASURY BILLS ISSUED 

Table

Amount (billion pesetas) .


Interest rate (%).


Nominal amount applied .


Nominalamount placed .


Total issued .


Issue date .


NOTES: 

Includes any placements at second auction round and possible cancellations of applications accepted at auction where full payment has not been made.
SOURCE: Bank of Spain.

INTERBANK DEPOSIT MARKET 

Table

NOTES: 

- Provisional.
- Average of daily figures.

SOURCE: Bank of Spain.

CAPITAL MARKET 

Stock market maintains advances in early stages of 1997 

The share market began January with the same strong upward tone as it had ended the year before.
The continuing rise on the New York stock exchange, the new cut in official interest rates on January 16 following publication of the good December inflation figure and the rise in trading which came as a result of the official announcement of the public offering of Telefónica stock put the IBEX-35 index at new all-time highs in January, specifically at 5,516.8 points on January 21, 7.2% above the close in 1996.
The high level of prices in itself and the sharp ups and downs on the New York stock exchange on subsequent days left the Spanish stock market with a high degree of uncertainty which translated into an increase in the volatility of prices even during the same stock market session.
As a result, during the final days of January the market suffered a clear decline largely interpreted as a logical technical correction which left the overall advance for the month at 3.5%.
As a result, the IBEX-35 dropped by 3.4% compared with the highs reached at mid-month.
The weak tone in the market continued in the first two sessions in February.

Nevertheless, the continuing rise of the dollar with its influence on IBEX table shares tableed on the other side of the Atlantic later on brought a recovery of prices, particularly shares of publicly-owned companies fully in the process of privatization, among which Telefónica was notable.
This recovery sharpened later on with publication of the consumer price index for January and the continuing rise on New York which went above the 7,000 barrier on February 13.
From then on, however, the market slowed its upward euphoria after being affected by the uncertainty arising from the level of prices and the notable volatility of the New York stock exchange.
By sector, the most significant advances in January came in food, construction, chemicals and banks.
On the other hand, the communications sector slowed its heady rise of previous months and electricals also showed a slight drop.
In the first 20 days of February the market rise was maintained by those sectors which had shown a weaker tone the previous month with the exception of electricals which continued to lose strength and construction companies which, on the other hand, continued to show major rises to the point where, along with food, this became the sector with the biggest price rise since the beginning of the year.
The high level of activity and volatility in the market was reflected in the spectacular volumes traded.
In fact, the effective volume of shares traded on the Madrid and Barcelona stock exchanges exceeded 2,000 billion pesetas in January, the highest figure ever reached in a single month.
The high volume of trading in Telefónica shares in this period, more than 400 billion pesetas, that is about 20% of total trading, was the cause.
In addition, we should mention that only ten shares made up somewhat more than 70% of total share trading.
Trading in fixed-income securities on the stock market in January on the other hand was not as lively as the year before.
In government securities trading amounted to 472.5 billion pesetas, a figure similar to that in December but well below that for the same month the year before.
The market in private bonds, however, in spite of trading volumes lower than last year, seemed to recover slightly.

Medium and long-term government bond market volatile 

In January, yields on government bonds continued the downward trend begun in March 1995 in a framework of improvement in the imbalances in Spain's economy.

Nevertheless, toward the end of January a series of statements questioning the desirability of having the countries of Southern Europe join the euro group right from the beginning caused doubts in the market and interest rates moved up to some extent and were quite erratic.
The differential with German 10-year bonds which had come close to the level of 0.8 points again went above one percentage point at the beginning of February.

In this context, at government bond auctions taking place on February 4 and 5 there was modest demand amounting to around 1,000 billion pesetas.
The Treasury placed only 52.0% of the total applied for but exceeded the placement targets previously set.
Compared with the previous round, marginal yields (the maximums reached) showed modest cuts although for 3-year bonds the drop was nearly a quarter-point (down to 5.66%) given the greater leeway in view of the wide differential with German bonds for the same term.
From the four issues, the Treasury took in 585.7 billion pesetas.
Nevertheless, given that there was a major maturity of 3-year bonds of more than 1,000 billion pesetas at the end of February, the month ended with a total of 22,160 billion pesetas in bonds outstanding, a decrease of 482.7 billion pesetas compared with the previous month and 389 billion pesetas compared with the end of 1996.
In addition, total holdings of government bonds by non-residents continued the downward trend since the end of November and at the end of the second week in February stood at 5,200 billion pesetas.

Following the auctions, thanks to the weakening of German bonds, yields on medium and long-term government bonds tended to return to the low levels reached in January.
As a result, toward mid-February the yield on German 10-year bonds stood at 6.6 points helped by the favourable figure on inflation in January.
Nevertheless, instability persisted and some increases took place in the third week in February putting the rate at 6.7 points and the differential with German 10-year bonds at 1.2 points.
In any case, this differential was still showing reasonable confidence in the incorporation of the peseta in the euro at the beginning of 1999.

SPANISH STOCK EXCHANGE INDICES 

Table

Index .


Official indices .


IBEX-35 .


Madrid .


Barcelona .


Bilbao .


Valencia .


Index by sector .


Banks and financial companies.


Electrical utilities .


Food .


Construction .


Portfolio investment .


Metals and machinery .


Oil and chemicals .


Communications .


Other industries and services .


NOTES: 

- Base on January 1, 1986 = 100.
- Madrid stock exchange.
- Base on January 1, 1990 = 3,000.

SOURCE: Stock exchanges and internal figures.

EFFECTIVE VOLUME OF TRADING IN SHARES AND FIXED-INCOME SECURITIES 

Table

Billion pesetas .


% change over year before.


Government Shares.


Long-term Government securities .


Long-term bonds .


NOTES: Stock exchange in Madrid and Barcelona.

SOURCE: Stock exchange in Madrid and Barcelona and internal figures.

MEDIUM AND LONG-TERM GOVERNMENT BOND ISSUES 

Table

3-year bonds.


10-year bonds.


15-year bonds.


NOTES: Includes possible placements in the second auction stage and possible cancellations of applications accepted at auction but not fully paid for.

SOURCE: Bank of Spain.

BANK MARKET 

Bank credit to private sector show signs of recovery 

Loan by banks and savings banks to companies and households in pesetas and foreign currency was up in January.
As a result, the year-to-year change rate rose to 9.7%.
By type of credit, the growth in mortgage loans was notable with an increase of 13.9% in 1996.
In addition, the performance in commercial credit intended to finance working capital of companies was erratic in recent months showing a year-to-year drop of 0.1% in January.
By type of institution, banks were more aggressive than savings banks in granting loans to the private resident sector in recent months.
Nevertheless, in the past twelve months savings banks showed greater relative growth with an annual change rate of 11.1%, as against 8.8% for banks.
On the other hand, loan default continued to decrease thanks to the good economic climate and risk control.
As a result, total doubtful loans to companies and households at banks and savings banks fell by 12.7 billion pesetas in the first month of the year.

The default rate thus dropped to 3.8% in January as against 5.1% one year earlier.
Deposits in banks and savings banks by the resident private sector, which have been on a moderating path in recent months, showed a substantial drop in January with an increase of only 1.2% compared with the same month in 1996.
Nevertheless, the performance is varied depending on the type of deposit.

Current accounts grew by 12.1% while savings deposits were up 7.9%.
On the other hand, time deposits showed a sharpening drop with a decrease of 5.8% in the last twelve months.
In addition, accounts in foreign currency moved in the direction of recovery but finally the total showed a reduction of 14.8% compared with January 1996.

Performance varied according to institution in the period January 1996-January 1997.
Savings bank deposits rose by 5.3% while bank deposits fell by 3.3%.
This different performance may partly be explained by bank campaigns promoting holdings in investment funds to the detriment of time deposits.
Nevertheless, in January savings banks also gave a big push to investment funds with some cost to their deposits.
As a result, in January the equity of investment funds grew spectacularly, up by 1,200 billion pesetas, the biggest one-month rise, to reach 19,900 billion pesetas.
The major growth in investment funds may be attributed to the gradual reduction in return on bank deposits and the better tax advantages.
At the same time, there was an increase in investment funds on the stock market in recent months in the face of the drop in interest rates.
As a result, assets in investment funds based on variable-income and mixed variable-income instruments increased by 228.9 billion pesetas in January to more than 1,000 billion pesetas whereas in January 1996 the figure was only 391 billion pesetas.
At the same time, we should point out the greater attractiveness of investment funds based on shares (FIM) for investors compared with investment funds based on money market assets (FIAMM) in view of the drop in yield of the latter with the result that the equity of the FIM again exceeded that of the FIAMM.
Total equity of pension funds also showed a spectacular increase in 1996, up 35.8% to 2,900 billion pesetas.

Bank interest rates continue to drop 

Bank interest rates in 1996 and in January this year continued the downward trend begun toward mid-1995 in keeping with other financial markets.
As a result, in a context of improvement in the imbalances in the economy, rates continued to converge with those of the more stable European economies and all-time low were marked up in a number of rates.
Prime interest rates at banks (on loans to best customers) stood at 8.32% in January while at savings banks the rate was 7.35%, with decreases of 1.89 and 2.11 points respectively compared with January 1996.

Loan accounts for one year to less than three years at banks stood at 8.24%, 2.71 points less than twelve months earlier while at savings banks rates stood at 9.04%, a drop of 3.04 points compared with January 1996.
Cost of consumer credit also went down in January dropping to 12.46% at banks and 11.22% at savings banks, decreases of 2.53 and 2.95 points, compared with the same month last year.
Mortgage loan rates continued to drop substantially.
As a result, the rate of lenders as whole in January stood at 7.87%, 0.31 points less than in December, a decrease of 2.94 points compared with the same month in 1996.
In similar vein, yields on deposits continued to drop.
Return on 1-2 year deposits at banks fell to 4.56% in January while at savings banks it dropped to 4.94%, decreases of 3.06 and 2.73 points respectively compared with the same month last year.

BANK LOANS AND DEPOSITS: COMPANIES AND HOUSEHOLDS (Change rates as percentage) 

Table

NOTES: 

Provisional figures.

Includes balances in pesetas and foreign currency.

Change rate annualized based on seasonally-adjusted series.
SOURCE: Bank of Spain and internal figures.

BANK INTEREST RATES (Monthly averages as percentage) 

Table

NOTES: 

Provisional figures.

Reference rates recommended by Bank of Spain for variable interest mortgage loan operations which also include 1-year Mibor, the annual percentage rate for bank mortgage loans and the composite rate (banks, savings banks and mortgage credit companies).
SOURCE: Bank of Spain.

SPECIAL REPORTS 

Spain's economy on path of convergence with Europe Spain's economy ended 1996 with a very favourable balance.
Within a framework of moderate recovery the general tone was characterized by a reduction of the main imbalances.
As a result, 1996 was a good year for employment, inflation, foreign balances and also for the government deficit.
In the financial sphere, the marked decrease in interest rates and the extraordinary stock market year rounded out a clearly positive picture.

Furthermore, advances were made in meeting the convergence criteria required under the Treaty of Maastricht in order for the peseta to participate in the single currency.
In terms of level of economic activity, 1996 ended with growth of the gross domestic product (GDP) of 2.3%, according to early estimates of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, a half-point lower than the year before.
It should be pointed out, however, that while in 1995 the profile of economic activity during the year was downward in 1996 the tone was one of gradual growth.
As a result, in the final quarter of 1996 the GDP grew at the rate 2.5%, according to Bank of Spain estimates, a half-point above the average of the first half-year.
As a result, growth was higher than in the European Union where the figure was 1.6%.
In spite of the favourable result in 1996, the growth rate of Spain's economy in recent years continues low.
In the first seven years of the Nineties, growth of Spain's GDP has been below that of the European Union in contrast to what happened in the second half of the Eighties.
This has prevented any advance in terms of "real" convergence given that Spain continues to stand at the lower levels of European Union classification in terms of per capita income in contrast, for example, to the notable advance achieved in Ireland.
The progressively better tone of the economy in 1996 was the result of two main factors.

First, the good performance in foreign demand following growth of exports and the relative containment of imports.
Second, the gradual recovery of private consumption which in spite of everything did not reach growth rates equal to those of the economy as a whole.
On the other hand, gross capital formation, depressed by the poor situation in construction, and public consumption brought about the moderation in growth of domestic demand.
The strength of the foreign sector was the result of the continuing growth of exports, both goods and services, and particularly of tourism.
In fact, sales abroad showed progressively increased growth in real terms throughout the year ending with growth of around 10% in the final quarter (6.7% in first quarter).
At the same time, imports maintained a relatively moderate and stable growth rate of around 7% thanks to lower purchases in energy and food consumer goods.
As a result, the foreign sector made a positive contribution to growth of the economy amounting to a half percentage point according to early estimates by the Bank of Spain.

Private consumption, in turn, showed better results as the year advanced.
In fact, from a growth rate of 1.6% noted in the first quarter it passed the 2% figure in the final quarter of the year.
The performance of gross capital formation was much more irregular.
As against the frankly positive tone in investment in capital goods which ended the year showing growth of more than 9%, construction investment showed clearly unfavourable results with sharp reduction in level of activity.
In fact, in the final quarter of 1996, gross capital formation in construction showed markedly negative rates, which meant that in the year as a whole the drop in this component of demand was more than 2%, according to the Bank of Spain.
In spite of everything, gross capital formation as a whole rose by 1.0% in 1996, clearly below the level of the previous year (8.2%).
Finally, public consumption maintained a tone of containment which was accentuated during the course of the year.
In fact, in the final quarter this figure grew at a rate close to a half percentage point, clearly below the growth rate shown in the first quarter of the year.
The reduction in the public deficit necessary meant moderation of this component of demand which, in 1996 as a whole, grew by 0.9% (1.3% the year before).
By production sector, the most notable performance came in the primary sector which was favoured by exceptionally good weather conditions.

Farm value added advanced spectacularly in 1996, a turn-around in the regressive tone in the two preceding years.
On the other hand, both industry and especially construction showed a drop in level of activity in 1996 which was more marked in the case of construction.
In spite of this, we should point out the slight growth profile of economic activity in industry in the final stages of the year.
Finally, the tertiary sector recorded growth of more than 2%, somewhat below the expansion rate the year before.

The sustained growth in economic activity gave place to notable job creation.
The Ministry of Economy estimates an increase of 190,900 jobs, a figure which in any case is lower than the increase in the number of persons registering with Social Security (241,400).
The results of the labour force survey appear to be more favourable given that the average increase in employment of 2.9% would mean nearly 350,000 new jobs, although we should take into account the upward distortion resulting from the changes made in preparing this indicator.
In spite of the good economic tone and progressive increase in private consumption, Spain's economy ended 1996 with the lowest inflation recorded since the Sixties.
The consumer price index stood at 3.2% in the final month of the year, showing a drop of somewhat more than one percentage point compared with December the year before.
The good performance in processed food prices and industrial goods was the determining element in this transcendental reduction in the inflation rate.
Thanks to this, the differential with the European Union was also notably reduced in spite of the favourable trend in prices in most European countries.
In any case, Spain's inflation rate was still one percentage point away from the minimum required under the Treaty of Maastricht which set 1.5 percentage points as the maximum over and above the average of the three best-placed countries.
The good performance in inflation and the strong pressure in markets, both the bond market and the foreign exchange market, opened the way to notable easing in monetary policy.
As a result, in 1996 the Bank of Spain cut the official intervention rate seven times taking it from the 9% in force at the beginning of 1996 to 6.25% at the end of the year.
It continued this policy into the beginning of 1997 when the rate stood at a new all-time low of 6%.

As a result of this policy, short-term interest rates showed sharp decreases in 1996 thus narrowing very significantly the differentials with the major countries.

With regard to Germany the situation changed from a differential of more than 5 percentage points at the beginning of the year to a differential of less than 3 points at year-end.
This process had a clear parallel which was even sharper in long-term rates to the extent that Spanish bonds showed lower differentials with German bonds on various occasions during the year to the point where at the beginning of 1997 the differential fell below 1 percentage point.
In spite of the sharp decrease in interest rates, the peseta showed notable stability against the main currencies of the European Monetary System.
In terms of the deutschemark, Spain's currency marked up a foreign exchange rate of around 84 units throughout the year without major ups and downs.

Nevertheless, the performance was different in terms of other European currencies such as the pound sterling and the lira and even against the U.S. dollar, currencies against which the peseta depreciated notably particularly from the third quarter of the year on.
On the other hand, the peseta showed considerable strength in terms of the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen.
The performance of the exchange rate in 1996 contributed to the positive tone of goods exports which grew by more than 13% in nominal terms.
In addition, the relative containment of imports with a nominal increase of around 8% meant a major reduction in the trade deficit (13.5%).
This positive tone also showed up in trade in services which was notable for a major increase in exports thanks to tourism in particular to the point where balance of the heading in the balance of payments relating to services amply exceeded the trade imbalance.
This contributed in a decisive way to a new surplus in the current account balance.
The spectacular turn-around in the financial account of the balance of payments which ended the year with a surplus of nearly 2,500 billion pesetas is a reflection of the major inflow of foreign capital.
As a result of these financial inflows and the positive figure for the current account balance, foreign reserves of the Bank of Spain showed a spectacular increase, more than 23.5 billion dollars, putting the year-end figure at 61.8 billion dollars, 61.7% higher than the year before.
With regard to the government budget, the 1996 balance shows its good and bad points depending on the criteria used to measure the public imbalance.
Thus if this figure is considered in terms of national accounting criteria, that is to say taking into account criteria of accrual of revenues and commitments, the central government deficit showed a major reduction putting it at 3.3% of the GDP, 2 decimals of a point below the target forecast by the government.
On the other hand, if we look at the Treasury deficit, the budget imbalance was 3,680 billion pesetas, 4.9% of the GDP showing 16.4% growth compared with the year before.
This difference is the result of payments arising from commitments contracted in previous years.
In any case, the budget year saw modest growth in revenue (3.9%) attributable largely to the weak growth in direct tax collections (2.3%).
On the other hand, indirect taxes maintained increased growth (up 6.3%) thanks to the increase in revenues from value added tax on domestic operations.
Central government non-financial spending rose by 6.2% at 2.7% if we subtract the effects of the budgetary shortfalls mentioned earlier.
Financial spending, with growth of 16.7%, and staff costs (up 5.9%) were the most expansionist headings.
By contrast, there was a notable contraction in spending on investment.
As a result of this trend, net central government grew by 11.3% to the amount of 41,100 billion pesetas, 55.6% of the GDP.
Finally, with regard to the stock market, 1996 turned out to be one of the most brilliant in recent years.
In fact, the IBEX-35 index recorded continuing all-time highs and ended the year with an advance of 41.7% compared with the year before, thanks to a final four months of real euphoria.
The downward situation in interest rates and the upward path of the New York stock exchange were the factors most directly behind the upward spurt of the Spanish stock exchange.
As a result of the good stock market year share trading also rose spectacularly (59.7%) to exceed 12,800 billion pesetas.

Stock market trading in bonds also was very active and trading more than doubled the figure of the previous year thanks to unusual growth in trading in government securities which exceeded 8,800 billion pesetas, somewhat more than 5,000 billion pesetas above the year before.

New programme of decontrol measures 

On February 22 the Cabinet approved a broad group of measures aimed at boosting and decontrolling the economy.

Nevertheless, in contrast to the urgent measures taken on June 7 last year (which were set out in seven decrees and a ministerial order) the present programme is made up of a long list of intentions to be brought into effect over time.
The plan approved foresees the reorganization of certain basic sectors of the economy and provides for a series of initiatives in widely varying areas (fiscal, financial, competition, environment, etc.).
The government also expressed its commitment regarding certain reforms (health care financing, the Social Security system, labour market) which are currently being discussed in various forums (parliamentary committees, contacts between business and unions, etc.).

Land and housing 

One of the most ambitious projects is that on the new Land-Use law which will take the place of the law passed in 1990 and the text revised in 1992.
The new law begins with the aim of promoting a significant increase in the amount of land available in order to bring an effective decrease in land prices.
As a result all land in the country will be without broad development controls (the reverse of the present situation in which land is considered of a rural nature unless later reclassified) with the only exception of those areas especially protected for their values of landscape, historical, scientific, environmental or cultural nature.
Another major change to be introduced in the new law is the strengthening of property rights in terms of building development.
In this respect, it limits the role of government to the regulation of those aspects of general interest (density, improper use and the provision of infrastructure).
Owners will therefore acquire greater freedom to programme their own development projects which will not be subject as now is the case to legal initiatives by the competent authorities.
In housing various tax measures are provided in order to stimulate construction.
Value added tax on housing with government subsidy is to be reduced from the present 7% to 4%.
In addition, in order to revive construction of housing for rental, real estate funds for such developments would be exempt from payment of corporation tax.
Furthermore, the law on Urban Leasing is to be modified with the aim of increasing legal security in the resolution of rental contracts, thus correcting certain limitations (although not spelled out) and simplifying tenant ejection procedures.
Infrastructure and transportation Another important package of measures refers to infrastructures.
Instruments allowing private participation in the financing of infrastructures will be developed.
Those aspects related to government contracting will also be subject to new regulations eliminating rigidities in order to reduce unnecessary costs of processing.
In the field of transportation, the government announced a "Renove" plan for commercial vehicles aimed at vehicle replacement and a range of measures in all areas.
The works programme of Renfe (Spanish National Railways) is to be revised and the office of Administrator of Railway Infrastructures aimed at channelling private financing is to be put into effect more quickly.
In another area, the government will draw up a new plan for motorways operated by concessionaires with the participation of private financing in certain public works and efforts will be made to negotiate a reduction in tolls.
Air transportation policy will be centred on liberalization of services rendered at airports (handling) and the drawing up of a new Civil Aviation law.
With regard to sea ports, the broadening of management autonomy is to shortly be approved (mechanisms aimed at avoiding unfair competition) while shifting management to Autonomous Communities.

Basic sectors and environment 

In the telecommunications sector there is to be a new general law regulating full services.
This will change from granting of a government concession to a system of regulated authorization with new operators.
One of the new operators will be built around Retevisión which is to be privatized.
Cable operators will also be able to give telephone service in their areas as of January next year.
At the same time, there is to be liberalization of telephone booth service.
In television, local and Autonomous Community networks will lose their character as public services and will change to a system of regulated authorization.
As a general measure, the government announced an increase in the decontrol of television broadcasting.
In the energy field, the development of the Electrical Protocol becomes the main hub of the new model of operation for the electrical sector involving decontrol of power generation and various tariff reductions.
In the gas sector, formulas for calculating maximum prices will be revised.
With regard to fuels, once prices of diesel fuel have been decontrolled, new decontrol measures are envisaged in fuel distribution (brought about by the recent conflict with truck drivers) as well as the setting of prices.

Other wide-reaching measures refer to reform of the Water Law which open the possibility of privatizing management of water services (with due guarantees to avoid speculative use) allowing the transfer of concession rights on private use of water.
The self-management of water channels by their actual users will also be promoted.
In addition, desalination of sea water will no longer be subject to government concession.
Finally, as in other activities the present judicial scheme will be modified in order to facilitate private financing of water works.
In the environmental sphere regulations will be developed under the Law on Containers in order to facilitate the integrated management of wastes by providing incentives for private investment in construction of plants.

Financial system and social security 

Measures affecting the financial system are aimed at improving mechanisms for corporate finance (with special attention to small and medium companies) and promoting stable savings over the long term.
Mutual investment organizations will be able to invest part of their portfolio in non-listed shares; funds without European Community status will be created (not marketable outside of Spain) which may invest without limit in any type of security or non-organized market; modifications will be made in the judicial scheme for reciprocal guarantee companies.
In another area, reforms will be made to the fiscal treatment of pension plans and funds in order to increase their degree of liquidity.

Unfair competition and judicial system 

The government's decontrol strategy rests largely on strengthening the Unfair Competition Tribunal.
This is to include the Unfair Competition Service which currently forms part of the Ministry of Economy.
In this way, a single body will be responsible for the preparation of proceedings and for making decisions in order to improve the degree of coordination between both activities and simplifying the process of resolving complaints.
Other measures are included in order to restrain certain monopolistic activities or practices.
There will also be effective decontrol of importation and wholesale trade in tobacco products from the European Union.
With regard to funerary services, implementation of the decree signed on June 7 will make it possible for companies to operate freely.
With regard to professional associations, a specific law will extend the regulations approved by parliament.
This will thus eliminate compulsory fees to provide for freedom in prices.
In addition, multiple association membership will be possible in order to stimulate free competition.
Among moves taken to reform regulations of a judicial and economic nature, of special note is the modification of legislation dealing with insolvencies in order to take action against default and strengthen the position of the creditor with regard to that of the debtor.
Regulations will also be modified with regard to leasing, factoring and franchising contracts in order to increase judicial security.
At the same time, a special commission is to be set up to study the judicial scheme relating to company boards of directors in order to improve their efficiency and management capacity.
Finally, a Statute of Users of Public Services is to be drawn up with the aim of removing administrative complexities and to simplify the citizen's relations with government.

GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT BY SPENDING COMPONENT(Percentage year-to-year change at constant prices) 

Table

NOTES: Official estimate.

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Economy and Finance and internal figures.

ESTIMATED EMPLOYMENT (Annual averages) 

Table

Sectors of economic activity.


Total .


% annual .


Agriculture .


Industry .


Construction .


Services .


SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics and internal figures.

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (Percentage change in December over December of year before) 

Table

SOURCE: National Institute of Statistics.

INTEREST RATES (Year-to-year average as percentage) 

Table

NOTES: Issues in primary market.

SOURCE: Bank of Spain.

SPOT RATE IN SPANISH MARKET FOR MAIN CURRENCIES (In pesetas) 

Table

US dollar .


Japanese yen .


Swiss franc .


Deutschemark .


French franc.


Pound sterling.


Italian lira .


ECU.


FOREIGN TRADE (Billion pesetas) 

Table

Imports .


Exports .


Trade balance.


SOURCE: Ministry of Economy and Finance and internal figures.

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS 

Table

Current account balance .


Central reserves.


Goods .


Services .


Transfers .


Incomes .


SOURCE: Secretary of State for Trade, Bank of Spain and internal figures.

BUDGET IMPLEMENTATION IN PUBLIC SECTOR 

Table

NET PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT (Billion pesetas) 

Table

NOTES: Net debt is equal to gross debt less the credit balance at the Bank of Spain.
Gross debt is the variable set out as a convergence condition under the Treaty of Maastricht which differs from that expressed in this table.
Includes non-negotiable domestic debt, assumed debt, and perpetual debt and currency in circulation.

Provisional.

SOURCE: Central Government Auditor-General and internal figures.

STOCK MARKET 

Table

Shares .


Bonds (volume of trading).


Volume of trading.


Indices .


Billion pesetas .


Madrid stock exchange .


Billion pesetas .


SOURCE: Bank of Spain and internal figures.
