
TISSUE ENGINEERING: The obstacles to building new organs from cells and synthetic polymers are daunting but surmountable

As the other articles in this special report indicate, tissue engineering has emerged as a thriving new field of medical science.
Just a few years ago most scientists believed that human tissue could be replaced only with direct transplants from donors or with fully artificial parts made of plastic, metal and computer chips.
Many thought that whole bioartificial organs-hybrids created from a combination of living cells and natural or artificial polymers-could never be built and that the shortage of human organs for transplantation could only be met by somehow using organs from animals.

Now, however, innovative and imaginative work in laboratories around the world is demonstrating that creation of biohybrid organs is entirely feasible.
Biotechnology companies that develop tissue-engineered products have a market worth of nearly $4 billion, and they are spending 22.5 percent more every year. 
But before this investment will begin to pay off in terms of reliably relieving human suffering caused by defects in a wide range of tissues, tissue engineering must surmount some important hurdles.

Off-the-Shelf Cells

Establishing a reliable source of cells is a paramount priority for tissue engineers.
Animal cells are a possibility, but ensuring that they are safe remains a concern, as does the high likelihood of their rejection by the immune system.
For those reasons, human cells are favored.

The recent identification of human embryonic stem cells-cells that can give rise to a wide array of tissues that make up a person-offers one approach to the problem.
But researchers are a long way from being able to manipulate embryonic stem cells in culture to produce fully differentiated cells that can be used to create or repair specific organs.

A more immediate goal would be to isolate socalled progenitor cells from tissues.
Such progenitors have taken some of the steps toward becoming specialized, but because they are not yet fully differentiated they stay flexible enough to replenish several different cell types.
Arnold I. Caplan of the Cleveland Clinic and his colleagues, for instance, have isolated progenitor cells from human bone marrow that can be prompted in the laboratory to form either the osteoblasts that make bone or the chondrocytes that compose cartilage.
Similarly, Lola Reid of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill has identified small, oval-shaped progenitor cells in adult human livers that can be manipulated in culture to form either mature hepatocytes-cells that produce bile and break down toxins-or the epithelial cells that line bile ducts.

Generating "universal donor" cell lines would be another approach.
To make such cells, scientists would remove, or use other molecules to mask, proteins on the surfaces of cells that normally identify the donor cells as "nonself." This strategy is now being used by Diacrin in Charlestown, Mass., to make some types of pig cells acceptable for transplantation in humans.
Diacrin also plans to use the "masking" technology to allow cell transplants between unmatched human donors.
It has received regulatory approval in the U.S. to begin human trials of masked human liver cells for some cases of liver failure. 

In principle, such universal donor cells would not be expected to be rejected by the recipient;
they could be generated for various types of cells from many different tissues and kept growing in culture until needed.
But it is not yet clear how universal donor cells will perform in large-scale clinical trials.

Parts Factories

Finding the best ways to produce cells and tissues has been far from straightforward.
Scientists have identified only a handful of the biochemical signals that dictate the differentiation of embryonic stem cells and progenitor cells into specialized cell types, and we cannot yet isolate cultures of stem cells and progenitor cells from bone marrow without having connective tissue cells such as fibroblasts mixed in.
(Fibroblasts are undesirable because they divide quickly and can overgrow cultures of stem cells.)

In addition, scientists need to develop more advanced procedures for growing cells in large quantities in so-called bioreactors, growth chambers equipped with stirrers and sensors that regulate the appropriate amounts of nutrients, gases such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, and waste products.
Existing methods often yield too few cells or sheets of tissue that are thinner than desired.

New solutions are beginning to appear, however.
For several years, researchers struggled to grow segments of cartilage that were thick enough for medical uses such as replacing worn-out cartilage in the knee.
But once the cartilage grew beyond a certain thickness, the chondrocytes in the center were too far away from the growth medium to take up nutrients and gases, respond to growth-regulating chemical and physical signals, or expel wastes.
Gordana Vunjak- Novakovic and Lisa Freed of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology solved the problem by culturing chondrocytes on a three-dimensional polymer scaffold in a bioreactor.
The relatively loose weave of the scaffold and the stirring action of the bioreactor ensured that all the cells became attached uniformly throughout the scaffold material and were bathed in culture medium.

Maximizing the mechanical properties of tissues as they grow in bioreactors will be crucial because many tissues remodel, or change their overall organization, in response to being stretched, pulled or compressed.
Tissue-engineered cartilage, for example, becomes larger and contains more collagen and other proteins that form a suitable extracellular matrix if it is cultured in rotating vessels that expose the developing tissue to variations in fluid forces.
(Extracellular matrix is a weblike network that serves as a support for cells to grow on and organize into tissues.)
Cartilage cultured in this way contains extracellular matrix proteins that make it stiffer, more durable and more responsive physiologically to external forces.

Likewise, John A. Frangos of the University of California at San Diego has shown that osteoblasts cultured on a base of collagen beads being stirred in a bioreactor make more bone minerals than they do when they are grown in a flat, stationary dish. 
And Laura E. Niklason, who is now at Duke University, has demonstrated that tissue-engineered small arteries made of endothelial cells (blood vessel lining) and smooth muscle cells shaped into tubes develop mechanical properties more akin to natural blood vessels if they have growth medium pulsed through them to imitate the blood pressure generated by a beating heart. 
Several other teams-including ours- are developing ways to grow skeletal and cardiac muscle, tissues that become stronger as they respond to physical stress.

Desirable Properties

Learning how to regulate cell behavior represents another important challenge.
Living systems are incredibly complex: 
The human liver, for example, contains six different types of cells that are organized into microscopic arrays called lobules.
Each cell can perform hundreds of different biochemical reactions.
What is more, the biochemical activity of each cell often depends on its interaction with other cells and with the network of extracellular matrix that wends through every tissue. 
David J. Mooney of the University of Michigan, for instance, has shown that hepatocytes produce varying levels of a given protein according to the stickiness of the material they are growing on.
To develop organs such as an implantable, bioartificial liver-one major goal of tissue engineering-researchers must better understand how to grow hepatocytes and other cells of the liver under conditions that maximize their abilities to perform their normal physiological roles.

Understanding "remodeling" will be essential for crafting bioartificial organs and tissues that become a permanent part of the recipient.
In the most successful laboratory tests of tissue-engineered products, the transplant has stimulated the growth of the recipient's own cell s and tissues, which have eventually replaced the artificial polymers and transplanted cells of the graft.
In collaboration with Toshiharu Shinoka and John E. Mayer of Children's Hospital in Boston, for instance, we have shown that a heart valve leaflet made of artificial polymers and lamb epithelial cells and myofibroblasts (a type of cell that helps to close wounds) became stronger, more elastic and thinner once transplanted into sheep.
Moreover, the leaflet no longer consisted of artificial polymers after 11 weeks:
it had been remodeled to contain only sheep extracellular matrix.
Still, the precise biochemical signals and growth factors that dictate such remodeling processes remain essentially unknown.

Creating new materials that are biodegradable and do not induce the formation of scar tissue is an emerging area of tissue engineering that offers many challenges.
Most of the materials now used as scaffolds for tissue engineering fall into one of two categories: synthetic materials such as biodegradable suture material or natural materials such as collagen or alginate (a gel-like substance derived from algae).
The advantage of synthetic materials is that their strength, speed of degradation, microstructure and permeability can be controlled during production; natural materials, however, are usually easier for cells to stick to.

Researchers are now trying to combine the best of both worlds to design new generations of materials with particularly desirable properties.
Some, for instance, are constructing biodegradable polymers that contain regions with biological activities that mimic the natural extracellular matrix of a particular tissue. 
One such polymer contains RGD, part of the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin.
RGD is named for the single-letter abbreviation for the amino acids it is made of: arginine (R), glycine (G) and asparagine (D).
Many types of cells normally stick to fibronectin by binding to RGD, so RGDcontaining polymers might provide a more natural environment for growing cells.

Other scientists are attempting to make polymers that conduct electricity, which might be useful in growing tissue-engineered nerves, or polymers that gel rapidly.
Such fast-setting polymers could be useful in injectable bioartificial products, including those that might be used to fill in a broken bone. 

Inducing the growth of blood vessels , a process known as angiogenesis, will be key to sustaining many tissue-engineered organs-particularly pancreases, livers and kidneys, which require a large blood supply.
Researchers have already successfully stimulated angiogenesis in bioartificial tissues growing in the laboratory by coating the polymer scaffolding supporting the tissues with growth factors that trigger blood vessel formation.
Future studies will need to examine the best ways for releasing the growth factors and controlling their activity so that blood vessels form only when and where they are needed.

To the Patient

Developing new methods of tissue preservation is important to ensure that tissue-engineered products survive the trip from the factory to the operating room in good working order and do not die during transplantation.
Technologies adapted from the field of donor-organ transplantation might be useful in this situation.
For example, surgeons now know that much of the injury to a transplanted organ occurs during reperfusion, when the organ is connected to a blood supply in the recipient.

Reperfusion induces the formation of oxygen free radicals, which literally poke holes in cell membranes and kill cells. 
To avoid reperfusion injury, surgeons currently add to the preservation solution chemicals that sop up such free radicals. 
Finding better molecules to protect tissue-engineered products from reperfusion injury and ischemic injury, which results when blood flow is insufficient, will be necessary.
Cryopreservation techniques also need to be perfected so that bioartificial organs and tissues can be kept frozen until needed; methods currently used for cells will need to be developed further to work for larger tissues.

Determining the federal regulatory process for tissue-engineered products still presents a thorny issue.
Bioartificial tissues and organs cut across nearly all the areas regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration: 
they are essentially medical devices, but because they contain living cells they also produce biological substances that act like drugs.
Accordingly, the FDA has treated the first tissue-engineered products to seek regulatory approval -two versions of bioartificial skin-as combination products. 
The agency is making tissue-engineering a priority area and is working to develop clear-cut policies to deal with bioartificial products.

We are confident that scientists and government regulators will clear all the hurdles described in this article to bring a variety of tissue-engineered products to the market in the coming years.
Much challenging work remains, but someday-perhaps many years from now-equipping patients with tissue-engineered organs and tissues may be as routine as coronary bypasses are today.
