
THE FIXED INCOME FINANCIAL DERIVATIVES EXCHANGE 

ARTICLE 1: GENERAL COMMENTS 

The present Regulations regulate the composition, functions, operations and activity norms of the Fixed Income Financial Derivatives Exchange.

The Exchange is regulated and managed by MEFF Sociedad Rectora de Productos Financieros Derivados de Renta Fija, S.A. (MEFF RENTA FIJA).

Regulations which are complementary to the present Regulations shall be established in the General Conditions of each Contract and in the Circulars issued by MEFF RENTA FIJA in accordance with the Regulations.

ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS 

The following terms shall have the meanings which are defined below, when they are used in the present Regulations and in the rules of the Fixed Income Financial Derivatives Exchange, except where otherwise implied by the context.

Underlying Security: Financial asset or index of financial assets which are the object of a Contract traded on the Market.

Close (a Contract): To carry out a transaction opposite to the original Contract, i.e. buying a contract identical to the one previously sold, or selling a contract identical to the one previously bought.
For two contracts to be identical, they must be of the same Class, Type and Series.

Class of Contract: Options and futures contracts referring to the same Underlying Security.

Client: Individual or company which carries out Transactions involving the purchase or sale of Contracts on the Exchange through a Member.

General Conditions: Market regulations that describe the specific features of each Contract.

Contract: Generic term covering all Futures and Options admitted to trade on the Exchange.

Futures Contract: A standard forward Contract by which the buyer is obliged to buy the Underlying Security and the seller is obliged to sell it at an agreed price (Price of the Future) on a future date (Settlement Date).
Until that date or until the contract is closed, Daily Settlements of Gains and Losses are made.

Given that settlement can be made in cash, the obligation to buy and sell can be substituted in this case by the obligation to comply with Settlement by Differences.

Option Contract: Standard Contract by which the buyer acquires the right, but not the obligation, to buy (CALL) or sell (PUT) the Underlying Security at an agreed price (Strike Price) on a future date (Settlement Date).
This contract can only be exercised on the Expiration Date (European Option) or at any moment before the Expiration Date (American Option), in accordance with the General Conditions of each Contract.

Given that settlement can be made in cash, the obligation to buy and sell can be substituted in this case by the obligation to comply with Settlement by Differences.

Market Maker: Members of the Exchange which agree, by contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA, to continuously quote bid and offer prices exclusively for their own account.

Clearing Account: Account where the Transactions carried out by its holder and positions which are opened through those Transactions are registered.

Daily Account: Account where all the Transactions carried out in a session are registered by a Member for their subsequent entry on either Own Accounts or Client Accounts.

Global Account: This account lists the Transactions which a Client has carried out using various different Commercial Identities, such that settlements and Margin Deposits may be calculated in relation to the net balance shown by this account.

Margin Deposits: Sum of margins required by MEFF RENTA FIJA for the purpose of covering the risks which MEFF RENTA FIJA assumes by the Contracts registered on each account.

Business Day: Days established as such on the calendar which MEFF RENTA FIJA shall publish before the beginning of each calendar year.

Execution of an Order: Action by which a buy or sell order given by a Member of the Market is satisfied.

In the case of Options, for an order to be executed, there needs to exist another order which takes the other side and which has the same following features:

- Class of Contract (same Underlying Security);
- Type of Option (CALL or PUT);
- Strike Price;
- Expiration Date; and
- Premium.

In the case of Futures Contracts, they should have the same following features:

- Class of Contract (same Underlying Security);
- Expiration Date; and
- Price of the Future;

Exercise: Action by which the buyer of an option makes use of the right to buy or sell the Underlying Security.

Exercise Day: Day on which an Option can be exercised.
The Exercise Date shall be established in the General Conditions of each Contract.

Settlement Date: Day on which the Futures or Options Contract is settled.
The Settlement Date shall be established in the General Conditions of each Contract.

Expiration Date: The last day on which an Options or Futures Contract can be registered on the Market.
The Expiration Date shall be established in the General Conditions of each Contract.

Future: Futures Contract.

Margins: Margin Deposits.

Commercial Identity: Code allocated to each Client for the purposes of carrying out Transactions on the Market.

Valuation Interval: All the points between the maximum and minimum price of the Underlying Security by which MEFF RENTA FIJA calculates the market prices of the Options and Futures which are subsequently used for the calculation of Margins.

Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses: Daily cash settlement of the differences between the Price of the Future agreed for the Futures traded on the same day as the calculation, and the Daily Settlement Price of that day, or between the Daily Settlement Price of the previous day and that of the day of the calculation for the Futures which were already open at the beginning of the day of the calculation.
After this procedure all the Futures Contracts are assumed to be agreed at the Daily Settlement Price.

Settlement at Expiration: Fulfilment of the Contract on the Settlement Date.
If the settlement is by delivery, the Underlying Security shall be exchanged for the applicable price.
If the settlement is in cash, it consists of the cash transfer corresponding to the difference between either the Strike Price or the Price of the Future, and the Settlement Price at Expiration.

Settlement of Transactions: System by which buyers of Options pay MEFF RENTA FIJA the appropriate Premiums for their purchases and sellers receive from MEFF RENTA FIJA said Premiums, and by which buyers and sellers of Futures settle with MEFF RENTA FIJA their corresponding Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses while they maintain Futures Contracts open.

Settlement in Cash: Procedure by which the Contract is satisfied on the Settlement Date only be means of the cash transfer of the difference between the price agreed in the Contract and the Settlement Price at Expiration.
Cash exchanges at expiration shall take into account, where applicable, the process of Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.

Settlement by Delivery: Procedure by which the Contract is satisfied on the Settlement Date only by means of the cash transfer of the difference between the price agreed in the Contract and the Settlement Price at Expiration.
Cash exchanges at expiration shall take into account, where applicable, the process of Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.

MEFF RENTA FIJA: MEFF Sociedad Rectora de Productos Financieros Derivados de Renta Fija, S.A. (MEFF The Governing Company for Fixed Income Financial Derivatives).

Exchange: Fixed Income Financial Derivatives Exchange.

Member: Exchange participant with direct access to the Market.

Clearing Member: Class of Member whose functions are to trade, to take responsibility for the satisfaction of obligations, to effect and receive payments and to buy and sell Underlying Securities under the terms and conditions of the present Regulations.

Custodian Clearing Member: Clearing Member which, in addition to the functions of a Clearing Member, also receives and keeps custody of Margins.

Non Clearing Member: Class of Member the function of which is to trade on the market.

Option: Options Contract.

Call Option: The holder of this Option has the right, but not the obligation, to buy the Underlying Security which is the object of the Contract at the Strike Price.
The seller of the Option is obliged to sell the Underlying Security if the buyer exercises his right.
Given that settlement may be made in Cash, in this case there would be no sale, but just a cash transfer.

Put Option: The holder of this Option has the right to sell the Underlying Security which is the object of the Contract at the Strike Price.
The seller is obliged to buy said Underlying Security if the buyer exercises its right.
Given that settlement may be made in cash, in this case there would be no sale, but just a cash transfer.

Combined Order: Order to buy or sell Contracts of more than one series which is conditional on the total execution of the Order.

Market Order: Order to buy or sell Contracts of the same series which does not include any condition other than the minimum Order form.

Reaction Period: The period of time considered necessary for MEFF RENTA FIJA to close all the Contracts registered on an Account.

Strike Price: Price agreed in the Option Contract at which the buyer of an option may buy (in the case of a Call Option) or sell (in the case of a Put Option) the Underlying Security.
The seller of the option is obliged to sell or buy (for Call and Put Options respectively) if the buyer exercises its right.

Price of Future: Price agreed in a Futures Contracts.
The price agreed is adjusted daily in accordance with the process for the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.

Settlement Price at Expiration: Benchmark price by which settlement in cash is calculated on the Exercise Date in the case of Options or on the Expiration Date in the case of Futures.

Technical Delivery Price: The price, used for purely technical purposes, at which all sales of the Underlying Security are made in the cases of settlements by delivery, with cash adjustments being made for the differences between the price agreed in the Contract and the Technical Delivery Price with account being taken, where applicable, of the process of Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.

Daily Settlement Price: Reference price by which Margin Deposits and Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses are calculated.

Premium: Sum which the buyer of an Option pays to the seller of the same.

First Trading Day: The first day on which an Options or Futures Contract may be traded on MEFF RENTA FIJA.
It shall always be a Business Day.

Valuation Point: One point in the Valuation Interval.

Registry: Action by which MEFF RENTA FIJA records transaction information in the appropriate accounts of its system for their subsequent clearing, settlement and margin calculation.

Series: In each Class of Contract, Options are of the same Series if they have the same Strike Price and the same Expiration Date, and Futures are of the same Series if they have the same Expiration Date.

Session Supervisor: Person with the function of ensuring that sessions are orderly and in accordance with the Regulations.

Account Holder: Member who administrates Global Accounts.

Types of Options: Call Options and Put Options.

Transaction: Action by which two Orders are brought together.

Order Transmission: Action by which a Member communicates an Order to the Market.

EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES 

The Exchange is the place where standardized Options and Futures Contracts and other derivative Contracts on underlying financial securities are traded, registered, cleared and settled and from where information on those Contracts is issued.
The specific features of each Contract and its form of Settlement are provided in the General Conditions of the Contract concerned.

The Contracts which are traded shall be represented by book-entry.

a To organize, run and regulate the Exchange, with the aim of achieving maximum efficiency in its operations.

b To take whatsoever decisions, in its own sphere of authority, which may improve the Market's operations.

c To distribute information on the Market.

d To request from the appropriate authorities the permission necessary for the modification of the present Regulations or General Conditions governing Contracts traded, or for the introduction of new Contracts.

e To act as Clearing House, taking the other side of all the Contracts which are registered.
In the development of this function, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall be the buyer for the selling party and the seller for the buying party.
All the rights and obligations of the Members or Clients involved in Transactions shall refer to MEFF RENTA FIJA which, in turn, requires the posting of Margins in accordance with the present Regulations.

f To calculate and demand Margins each day.

g To approve Circulars, with which Members shall be obligated to comply, as part of its functions of organising, running, regulating and supervising the market.
The Circulars must be published at least five days before they enter into force.



In extraordinary cases, MEFF RENTA FIJA may publish Circulars which enter into force in a shorter period of time than indicated above.

Among others, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall publish, through Circulars, various operative Manuals for use on the Exchange at all times.

The Spanish Securities Exchange Commission ( Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores ) may suspend or annul the above mentioned Circulars if it considers that they infringe the legislation of the Securities Markets or impair the correction and transparency of the price formation process or the interest of investors.

In general, comply with the present Regulations and with legislation relevant to the Exchange and ensure that said Regulations and legislation are complied with (function of Supervision).

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall only carry out Transactions on the Market under the conditions provided in the present Regulations.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall not be responsible for the damage or loss suffered by any Exchange Member as a result of an act of God or of force majeure or, in general, of any factor in which there was not deemed to have been wilful misrepresentation or serious guilt on the part of MEFF RENTA FIJA or of any of its employees.

MEMBERS OF MEFF RENTA FIJA 

CLASSES AND FUNCTIONS 

The Members of the Exchange shall belong to one or more of the following classes: Non Clearing Member, Clearing Member and Custodian Clearing Member.
In addition, they may act as Market Makers under the terms of the present Regulations.

Non Clearing Member.

Requirements for the acquisition of this status 

Be a Securities Company (Sociedad de Valores) or Securities Agency (Agencia de Valores) , Bank, Savings Bank or any of the other classes of organization indicated in parts a), b) and c) of article 76 of the Securities Markets Act (Ley del Mercado de Valores) , proof of which shall be provided by submission of the appropriate documentation issued by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

Hold a contract with a Clearing Member and submit a copy of this contract to MEFF RENTA FIJA.
A Non Clearing Member may hold contracts of this type with various Clearing Members.

Hold a contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA, accepting its regulations governing activities and operations under the terms of the present Regulations.

Functions of the Non Clearing Members 

To trade directly on the Exchange, for their own account or on behalf of Clients.

Clearing Member. 

Requirements for the acquisition of this status

Be a Securities Company or Securities Agency, Bank, Savings Bank or any of the other classes of organization indicated in parts a), b) and c) of article 76 of the Securities Markets Act, proof of which shall be provided by submission of the appropriate documentation issued by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

Hold a contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA, accepting its regulations governing activities and operations under the terms of the present Regulations.

Hold a contract with the Custodian Clearing Member where it will post and adjust the Daily and Extraordinary Margins whenever applicable.
A Clearing Member may hold contracts of this type with various Custodian Clearing Members.

Post an Initial Margin with MEFF RENTA FIJA for the purposes of guaranteeing at all times the satisfaction of its obligations with relation to the posting and maintenance of margins for open positions and with relation to all types of cash settlements within the stipulated periods.

Functions of the Clearing Members 

To trade directly on the Exchange, for their own account or on behalf of Clients.

To take responsibility for the satisfaction of obligations to MEFF RENTA FIJA regarding the posting and maintenance with the applicable adjustments of Margins and regarding settlements resulting from Transactions carried out on the Exchange, both for its own account and on behalf of its Clients.

To take responsibility for the satisfaction of obligations to MEFF RENTA FIJA regarding the posting and maintenance with the applicable adjustments of Margins and regarding settlements resulting from Transaction carried out by other Members with which such an arrangement has been agreed and of which notification has been given to MEFF RENTA FIJA.

To effect or receive payment to or from MEFF RENTA FIJA for all cash settlements which do not correspond to sales/purchases of the Underlying Security, provided that it has a Cash Account (Cuenta de Tesorería) with the Bank of Spain.
Those Clearing Members which do not have a Cash Account with the Bank of Spain, or having such an account so desire, must arrange for cash settlements with a financial organization which does have such an account, with this arrangement representing no transfer of responsibility.

To effect the sale/purchase of Underlying Securities in case of Settlement by Delivery, provided that it has direct access to the Underlying Securities settlement service.
Those Clearing Members which do not have direct access to the Underlying Security settlement service, or having it so desire, must arrange for these operations to be carried out through a financial organization which does have access to said service, with this arrangement representing no transfer of responsibility.

Custodian Clearing Member 

Requirements for the acquisition of this status 

Be a Securities Company or Securities Agency, Bank, Saving Bank or any of the other classes of organization indicated in parts a), b) and c) of article 76 of the Securities Markets Act, proof of which shall be provided by submission of the appropriate documentation issued by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

Be a Public Debt Book-Entry Management Institution with full powers to hold accounts for third parties.
The General Conditions of each futures or options Contract may modify this requirement.

Hold a contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA, accepting its regulations governing activities and operations under the terms of the present Regulations.

Post an Initial Margin with MEFF RENTA FIJA for the purposes of guaranteeing at all times the satisfaction of its obligations with relation to the posting and maintenance of margins for open positions and with relation to all types of cash settlements within the stipulated periods, in addition to its obligations to receive and keep custody of Margins.

Functions of the Custodian Clearing Members 

To trade directly on the Exchange, for their own account or on behalf of their Clients.

To take responsibility for the satisfaction of obligations to MEFF RENTA FIJA resulting from Transactions carried out on the Exchange, both on its own account and on behalf of its Clients.

To take responsibility for the satisfaction of obligations to MEFF RENTA FIJA resulting from Transactions carried out by other Members with whom such an arrangement has been agreed and of which notification has been given to MEFF RENTA FIJA.

To effect or receive payment to or from MEFF RENTA FIJA for all cash settlements which do not correspond to sales/purchases of the Underlying Security, provided that it has a Cash Account with the Bank of Spain.
Those Custodian Clearing Members that do not have a Cash Account with the Bank of Spain, or having such an account so desire, must arrange for cash settlements with a financial organization which does have such an account, with this arrangement representing no transfer of responsibility.

To effect the sale/purchase of Underlying Securities in case of Settlement by Delivery, provided that it has direct access to the Underlying Securities settlement service.
Those Custodian Clearing Members which do not have direct access to the Underlying Securities settlement service, or having it so desire, must arrange for these operations to be carried out through a financial organization which does have access to said service, with this arrangement representing no transfer of responsibility.

To receive, accept on behalf of MEFF RENTA FIJA and keep custody of the Margins in the favour of MEFF RENTA FIJA corresponding to open positions on the Market by itself, by its Clients and by Members with which such an agreement has been made.

MEFF RENTA FIJA may authorize those Custodian Clearing Members, which desire not to hold the function of Market traders and which so request, to add to their Member name the words "non-trading".

MEFF RENTA FIJA must be informed of the conditions which the Custodian Clearing Members may apply with respect to the custodian service and the investment of the Margins within the first five days of each calendar quarter, except where there exists no modification, and they shall be made available to the interested parties.

Market Maker.

Requirements for the acquisition of this status

Have been admitted as a Member in any of the classes.

Hold a specific Market Maker contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA.

Functions of the Market Makers 

To trade directly on the Exchange, only for their own account and in compliance with the trading obligations as established by Circulars.

The Board of Directors of MEFF RENTA FIJA may limit the number of Market Makers for each contract traded.

Limits 

MEFF RENTA FIJA may limit, by means of Circulars, the volume of Transactions and open positions that the Members, according to their class, may carry out or hold.

MEFF RENTA FIJA may limit, by means of Circulars, the amounts of Daily Margins posted with a Custodian Clearing Member.

a Through the loan of a limit from another Member, in which case the lending Member shall be solely responsible for the borrowing Member for the part of the limit that has been loaned.
The limit available for the lending Member shall be reduced by the amount loaned.
This means of extension may not be applied to the limit of Daily Margins posted with a Custodian Clearing Member.

b Through a pledge to MEFF RENTA FIJA of book-entry Public Debt or of any other securities that MEFF RENTA FIJA may establish.

c Other means which may be established by Circular.



RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS 

The rights of the Members, in so far as they are established in accordance with each of their classes, and without prejudice to other rights which may derive from the present Regulations, from their contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA or from relevant legislation, are as follows:

a To carry out Transactions on the Market, for their own account or on behalf of their Clients, where applicable.
b To receive information from the Exchange on the same terms as all other Members.
c To receive information relating to the Transactions which have been carried out on their accounts.
d To receive Premiums and cash settlements, including the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses, corresponding to the Transaction which they carry out, where applicable.
e To exercise Options of which they are the holders.
For the exercise of Options to have validity, notification must be given to MEFF RENTA FIJA in the way established by MEFF RENTA FIJA.

f To receive, where applicable, the sums corresponding to the Settlement in Cash at the Expiration or Exercise of Contracts registered on their accounts.
When Settlement is made by delivery, to receive the agreed price in exchange for the Underlying Security, or to receive the Underlying Security in exchange for the agreed price, in addition to carrying out, or, where appropriate, agreeing to have carried out on their behalf, the appropriate operations in the Market on which the Underlying Security is traded, all under the conditions established by MEFF RENTA FIJA.

g To file complaints in accordance with the procedures established in the present Regulations and in their contracts with MEFF RENTA FIJA.


The obligations of the Members, in so far as they are established in accordance with each of their classes, and without prejudice to other obligations which may derive from the present Regulations, from their contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA or from relevant legislation, are as follows:

a To comply with, and to ensure compliance with, the present Regulations in accordance with the provisions established herewith.
b To provide MEFF RENTA FIJA with the required information as regards themselves or their Clients, as appropriate.
c To pay Premiums, cash settlements, including Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses, and commissions corresponding to the Transactions that they carry out, or for which they are responsible in accordance with the Regulations.
d To pay, where applicable, the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash at Expiration or on exercise of the Contracts registered on their account.
When Settlement is by delivery, to pay the price agreed in exchange for the Underlying Security, or to deliver the Underlying Security in exchange for the agreed price, in addition to carrying out, or, where appropriate, agreeing to have carried out on their behalf, the appropriate operations in the Market on which the Underlying Security is traded, all under the conditions established by MEFF RENTA FIJA.

e To give notification of the above mentioned circumstance in the closing Transactions.
f To post or adjust Margins, where applicable.
g When acting on behalf of Clients, to transmit their Clients' Orders to the Market, including exercise Orders, where applicable, and to fulfil the obligations described in c), d), e) and f) on behalf of their Clients.
h In the case of Clearing Members or Custodian Clearing Members with contracts with a Non Clearing Member, to comply with obligations c), d) and f) on behalf of the Non Clearing Member.
i To maintain a book of Orders received from Clients.
j To comply with and to ensure compliance with the regulations of conduct provided in articles 78 to 83 of the Securities Markets Act.

THE MINIMUM CONTENTS OF CONTRACTS BETWEEN MEFF RENTA FIJA AND MEMBERS AND BETWEEN MEMBERS THEMSELVES 

The minimum contents of the contracts signed between MEFF RENTA FIJA and the Clearing Members shall include the following:

a The contract shall recognise the right of the Member to operate as such on the Market, in accordance with the Exchange Regulations and the General Conditions of the Contracts traded.

b The Member shall accept that, in those aspects not expressly treated by the Contract, the provisions of the Exchange Regulations shall apply.

c The Member shall declare complete knowledge of all the Exchange Regulations, the legal legislation applicable to said Exchange and to Transactions that may be carried out therein, and of the General Conditions of the Contracts traded, in addition to the Circulars which MEFF RENTA FIJA may issue.

d The Member shall expressly accept the terms and conditions of the legislation mentioned in the preceding paragraph, and of their own contract, without restrictions or reservations, and shall be obliged to strictly respect them.

e The above acceptance shall extend to any modification or addition introduced by any competent authority, and to any modifications that MEFF RENTA FIJA may impose in the future with the authorization of the pertinent authorities.
The modifications or additions may not enter into force before Members are notified in writing.
The contract shall stipulate the right of a Member to resign as a consequence of said modifications.

f The Member of the Exchange shall agree to notify MEFF RENTA FIJA, immediately and in writing, of any significant modification in their statutes, their nature and their financial position, specially those modifications which affect the requisites for the class of Member of the Exchange to which the Member belongs.

g The Member shall agree also to notify MEFF RENTA FIJA of information relating to Transactions carried out for their own account or on behalf of any of their clients if the pertinent authorities so demand it, or if it should be in the general interest of the Exchange.

h MEFF RENTA FIJA may provide information on a Member of the Exchange to authorities or guardianship organizations of this same Member if so is requested.
To the extent that it is possible, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall inform the affected Member of the contents of said information. 

i The Member shall expressly accept the disciplinary proceedings and the liquidation of Margins which are provided in the Exchange Regulations.

j The Member shall agree to sign a contract with each of their Clients, in accordance with the standard model established in the Exchange Regulations before accepting any buy or sell Order.
In said contract the Tax Identification Number (Número de Identificación Fiscal) of the Client must appear, which the Member shall communicate to MEFF RENTA FIJA, for the sole purpose of monitoring compliance with the established limits on positions opened.
Notwithstanding, in the event that the pertinent authorities should require of MEFF RENTA FIJA information on any Client of a Member, MEFF RENTA FIJA may require the Member, which must fulfil this obligation, to supply the pertinent authority or MEFF RENTA FIJA with the information in question.

k The Members shall agree to obtain acceptance of the provisions of the Exchange Regulations from their Client.

l The Clearing Member shall agree to sign a contract with each of their Non Clearing Members, which must include the minimum clauses established in the Regulations.

m The Member shall agree to post and maintain with the appropriate adjustments the Margins which are required to become a Member and the Margins corresponding to their own positions on the Market.

n The Member shall give MEFF RENTA FIJA a firm and irrevocable order to Close, on behalf of the Member, all the Contracts registered on their Own Account in the event that the Member does not fulfil any of their obligations and, particularly, those relating to the posting or adjustment of Margins, cash settlement or Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.

o The Members shall agree to obtain from their Clients and Non Clearing Members the Margin Deposits corresponding to the positions taken by their Clients, their Non Clearing Members and their Clients and, where applicable, to transfer said Deposits to the pertinent Custodian Clearing Member, within the established periods and under the established conditions.

p The Members shall declare themselves solely responsible for the posting and maintenance with the appropriate adjustments of Margin Deposits by their Clients and Non Clearing Members with which they have agreements, and by the Clients of their Non Clearing Members.

q The Members shall be responsible for the payment of commissions, Premiums or settlements to MEFF RENTA FIJA for Transactions which they, or their Non Clearing Members, carry out on the Market, including Daily Settlements of Gains and Losses on Futures, be they for their own account or on behalf of Clients.
The Member must give MEFF RENTA FIJA notification of through which entity it will effect and receive payments relating to Market settlements.

r The Members shall agree to immediately inform MEFF RENTA FIJA of any violation by any of their Clients or Non Clearing Members of their obligations, indicating, if requested by MEFF RENTA FIJA, the exact identity of those Clients and information included in the Member-Client contract.

s MEFF RENTA FIJA may verify, by whatever methods are appropriate, a Member's compliance with its obligations in accordance with the Regulations and the Member must cooperate with this verification.

t The Member shall agree to fulfil all their pending financial obligations with MEFF RENTA FIJA and, where applicable, with their Clients, even where the party in question has, for whatever reason, ceased to be a Member of the Exchange.

u The Member shall agree to ensure that the conduct regulations provided in articles 78 to 83 of the Securities Markets Act are fulfilled.

v The Member and MEFF RENTA FIJA shall agree to submit any conflicts that may arise in relation to the interpretation, validity or fulfilment of the contract, to legal arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the Spanish Act for the Arbitration of Private Law, renouncing any other right to which they may be entitled.


The minimum contents of the contract signed between MEFF RENTA FIJA and a Custodian Clearing Member shall include, in addition to the provisions for Clearing Member contracts, the following:

a The Custodian Clearing Members shall agree to inform MEFF RENTA FIJA of the posting of the Margin Deposits, declaring themselves responsible for the Margins the posting of which they have informed MEFF RENTA FIJA, and for the obligations which correspond to them as Members.

b The Custodian Clearing Members shall be obliged to release the Margins only on the instructions of MEFF RENTA FIJA, and to deliver them to MEFF RENTA FIJA in the event that the latter, in the application of the Regulations, should demand such action.
MEFF RENTA FIJA may, at any time, order the Custodian Clearing Member to transfer the Margins to a different entity.

c The Custodian Clearing Member shall accept in the name of MEFF RENTA FIJA the Margins which are posted in its favour.


The minimum contents of the contracts held between MEFF RENTA FIJA and the Non Clearing Members shall include the following: Clauses a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, l, m, q, r, s, t and u of section 6.1. wherever they are applicable.

The minimum contents of the contracts held between MEFF RENTA FIJA and the Market Makers shall include, in addition to the those conditions corresponding to its Member class, the following:

a The Market Makers, as such, shall agree to operate on the Market for their own account.

b The Market Makers shall agree, in exchange for favourable conditions, to continuously quote prices for the Contracts indicated by the Market Maker contract, under the conditions established by the corresponding Circular.

c The Contract shall specify the consequences of any violation of the Market Makers' obligation to quote prices.

d The Market Maker, if it carries out activities in addition to those of Market Maker, shall agree to maintain the different accounts completely separate and in each Transaction that it carries out on the Market it shall expressly specify in which capacity it acts.
In addition, MEFF RENTA FIJA may verify, by whatever means it considers appropriate, the required separation of the internal functions of the entity.

d The Contract shall specifically establish the right of the Market Makers to rescind the contract in the event that their obligations as Market Makers are modified.


The minimum contents of the contract held between a Clearing Member and a Non Clearing Member shall include the following:

a The Clearing Member shall be responsible to MEFF RENTA FIJA for Margin Guarantee posting and maintenance with appropriate adjustments, the payment of commissions, premiums and settlements, including Daily Settlements of Gains and Losses, resulting from transactions carried out on the Market by the Non Clearing Member, be it for their own account or on behalf of Clients.

b The Clearing Member shall effect and receive cash payments resulting from transactions carried out on the Market by Non Clearing Members.

c The Clearing Member may, at any time, request from MEFF RENTA FIJA information on the global risk position on the Market of the Non Clearing Member.


The minimum contents of the contracts held between a Custodian Clearing Member and a Clearing Member shall include the following:

a The deposits which the Clearing Member may post with the Custodian Clearing Member in accordance with the Exchange Regulations shall be applied, exclusively, to the obligations that the Clearing Member acquires as a consequence of its activities on the Market.

b The Custodian Clearing Member shall be responsible for the Margins posted with it, having agreed to notify MEFF RENTA FIJA of any incompliance.

c The Clearing Member is aware of the legal power of MEFF RENTA FIJA to transfer the Margin Deposits at any time.

d The Deposit may be reduced or released only on orders from MEFF RENTA FIJA.


CLIENTS

RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS

The general rights of Clients with an open account with a Member are the following:

a To carry out Transactions on the Market giving buy or sell Orders to their Member so that the latter may transmit such Orders to the Market.
b To receive information relative to the Transactions registered on their accounts.
c To demand from the Member or Members through which they operate to comply strictly with the provisions of the present Regulations and to file complaints in accordance with the procedures established in the present Regulations.

The specific rights of Clients, in their operation on the Market, are the following:

a To receive the agreed Premium in the sale of Options.
b To receive, where applicable, the gains produced in the Transactions whereby Futures are closed.
c To receive, where applicable, the sum of the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses corresponding to their position in Futures.
d To exercise, on the Exercise Date, the Options which they hold. For the exercise of Options to have validity, it must be notified to MEFF RENTA FIJA through the Member in the way established by MEFF RENTA FIJA.

e To receive, where applicable, the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash at the expiration or Exercise of Contracts registered on their accounts, when said settlement is in cash.
f To receive or deliver the Underlying Security in exchange for the price agreed in the Contract in the Settlement at expiration of Contracts or on their Exercise, when said settlement is by delivery of the Underlying Security, with the appropriate operations being carried out, through the appropriate channels, on the Market where the Underlying Security is traded.

These rights refer to Transactions registered on the Market and are not applicable to exclusive relations between the Client and the Member outside the scope of these Regulations.

The rights of the Client concerning the receipt of cash payments have regard to its Member, such that whenever MEFF RENTA FIJA is obliged to pay cash to a Client it shall do so by placing the funds with the Member in the favour of the Client.

The general and specific obligations of Clients with an open account with a Member are the following:

a To comply in all respects with the present Regulations and with the contract signed with the Member.
b To pay the Premium agreed in the purchase of Options.
c To pay, where applicable, the Losses caused in operations whereby Futures are closed.
d To pay, where applicable, the sum of the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses corresponding to their position in Futures.
e To pay, where applicable, the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash, at the expiration or Exercise of the Contracts registered on their account.
f To deliver or receive the Underlying Security in exchange for the agreed price at Settlement at the Expiration of the Contracts or when they are exercised, when said settlement is by delivery of the Underlying Security, with the appropriate operations being carried out, through the appropriate channels, on the Market where the Underlying Security is traded.
g To give notification of above mentioned circumstance in the closing Transactions.
h To pay the commissions corresponding to each Transaction.
i To post and maintain with adjustments the appropriate Margins when required.

The list of rights and obligations included in the preceding paragraphs of this article is not exhaustive, and they apply without prejudice to all other obligations and rights which may result from the present Regulations or from the relevant legislation.

STANDARD MODEL CONTRACT BETWEEN MEMBERS AND THEIR CLIENTS

The minimum contents of the standard model contract to be signed between the Members and their Clients shall consist of the following:

1 Corporate name, address and Tax Identification Number of the Member. Name or names of the person or persons who represent the Member, and the following information on their authorization: notary, protocol number, place and date.

2 Corporate or individual name, address and Tax Identification Number of the Client. If the signatory acts by authorization, their name and the following information on their authorization: notary, protocol number, place and date.

3 The account number allocated to the Client.
4 Declaration by the Client of knowledge and acceptance of all the Regulations of the Exchange, the General Conditions of the tradable Contracts, the Exchange Circulars and other regulations, applicable at any time, without restriction or reservation, and accepting the obligation to strictly respect them.
- The CLIENT shall appoint the MEMBER as commission agent, and said agent shall accept to intervene on the Market on their own behalf and on behalf of the CLIENT.

- The MEMBER gives a guarantee to the CLIENT that it will transmit to the Market the orders it receives from the CLIENT in the application of the present contract and that it will effect whatsoever actions that may be necessary for the realization of Transactions.

- The CLIENT is aware that MEFF SOCIEDAD RECTORA DE PRODUCTOS FINANCIEROS DERIVADOS DE RENTA FIJA, S.A. ("MEFF RENTA FIJA") shall take the other side of the Transactions that are carried out, provided that the Orders have been properly transmitted by the MEMBER.

- The CLIENT agrees to post and adjust the Margins which correspond to the Contracts registered on its account.

- The CLIENT accepts that, in the event that the appropriate Margins are not posted or adjusted in the amounts and by the periods established, MEFF RENTA FIJA may close on behalf of the Client all its positions on the Market, and liquidate the Margin previously posted if this be necessary, delivering to the Client the result of said liquidation if in the favour of the Client or demanding it from the Client if in the favour of MEFF RENTA FIJA.

- In the application of the above, the CLIENT gives MEFF RENTA FIJA a firm and irrevocable order to Close, on behalf of the CLIENT, all the Contracts registered on its account in the event that the CLIENT should fail to comply with any of its obligations as regards the posting or adjustment of Margins, Option Premium payments, payments of Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses, settlement by exercise or at expiration or in the payment of commissions to MEFF RENTA FIJA.


- MEFF RENTA FIJA commissions. The commissions charged by MEFF RENTA FIJA are those listed in the tariffs of MEFF RENTA FIJA in force at any given time which shall be communicated to the Client on the signing of the contract.

- MEMBER commissions. The commissions charged by the MEMBER to the CLIENT are those which have been freely agreed by the MEMBER and the CLIENT which are attached as an appendix and signed by the parties.


- The CLIENT authorizes the MEMBER to effect and receive on its behalf the payments which result from the Client's participation on the Market.

- The CLIENT agrees to the payment of commissions, Premiums and settlements, including the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses, for Transactions carried out on its behalf on the Market.

- The MEMBER agrees to the payment to the CLIENT of the Premiums and settlements received from MEFF RENTA FIJA corresponding to the Transactions carried out on the Market on behalf of the Client.


- The CLIENT gives its authorization for its name and Tax Identification Number, which appears on the present contract, to be communicated to the pertinent authorities by the MEMBER, or by MEFF RENTA FIJA, if this should be necessary.


- The CLIENT exonerates the MEMBER and MEFF RENTA FIJA from any damages that it may incur by force majeure or by suspension or interruption of the Market.


- Prior intervention by MEFF RENTA FIJA. For the resolution of CLIENT complaints against the MEMBER or against MEFF RENTA FIJA, prior to any legal action, arbitrational or judicial, the CLIENT shall inform, in writing, MEFF RENTA FIJA, Vía Laietana 58, planta 6, 08003-BARCELONA, identifying, if applicable, the MEMBER against whom the complaint is made and describing in detail the complaint and the facts on which it is based.
Within a period of not more than 15 calendar days, MEFF RENTA FIJA will take steps to bring the two parties to an agreement.
If after this period no agreement has been reached between the parties, MEFF RENTA FIJA will give notification of this circumstance and it shall refer the two parties to the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission, stating, if applicable, whether the MEMBER has acted correctly or not and proposing a solution to the complaint.

- Arbitrational proceedings. As an optional clause the following clause may be included: The Client and the Member agree to submit all disagreements that may arise between them or between the Client and MEFF RENTA FIJA to Arbitration Law proceedings under the terms included in article 9.4. of the Regulations which is reproduced here, with the parties agreeing to comply with the arbitrational decision passed.


11 Following the phrase "And in conformity with the above, the two parties sign the present contract, in (place), on (date)", there shall be a space for the signatures.

12 In a prominent and visible place the following warning shall appear: "The trading of Options and Futures requires constant position monitoring.
These instruments have a high-risk factor if not properly managed.
Profit can rapidly turn into loss as a consequence of price movements.
Trading in Options and Futures requires knowledge and sound judgement."


CLIENT COMPLAINT AND ARBITRATION PROCEDURES

In the event that a Client has a complaint against a Member, before any legal, arbitrational or judicial action, the Client shall write to MEFF RENTA FIJA, identifying the Member against which the complaint is brought, describing in detail the complaint and the facts which surround it.

The procedure by which a complaint shall be resolved shall be that which must appear in the contract between the Member and the Client, as established in part 10.1. of article 8 of the present Regulations.

If MEFF RENTA FIJA considers that the actions of the Member have not been not correct, it shall apply the disciplinary measures stipulated in the present Regulations.

In the event that the Client or the Member do not agree with MEFF RENTA FIJA's decision, they may initiate arbitration proceedings provided in the following paragraph, within a period of fifteen calendar (15) days counting from MEFF RENTA FIJA's notification that no resolution had been reached between the parties, and they shall inform MEFF RENTA FIJA of the beginning of arbitration proceedings.

For the resolution of whatsoever conflicts that may arise in the course of the Exchange's business, the involved parties shall submit said questions to legal arbitration which shall be regulated by the provisions of the Spanish Act for the Arbitration of Private Law of December 15, 1988, and in so doing they renounce any other right to which they may be entitled.
An arbitrator shall be appointed by common agreement between the two parties and, if this is not possible, each one of the parties shall appoint an arbitrator and these arbitrators, in turn, shall appoint a third party, which shall act as Chair.
In the event that one of the parties does not appoint an arbitrator within the period of five (5) calendar days following the notification to MEFF RENTA FIJA of the initiation of the arbitration proceedings, the arbitrator which has been appointed by one of the parties shall be understood to have been accepted as arbitrator by the party which has renounced its right to appoint one, and so the arbitration shall be carried out by only one arbitrator.

Notification of the appointment shall be made, by a means which allows its receipt by the arbitrator or arbitrators to be verified, for its acceptance.
If the arbitrator or arbitrators have not accepted in writing to whomsoever made the appointment in a period of fifteen (15) calendar days counting from the day following the notification, it shall be understood that the appointment has not been accepted.
Hence, in the event that one of the parties has appointed an arbitrator which has not accepted the appointment, the other party shall have a last period of five (5) calendar days to appoint a new arbitrator.
Once the appointments have been accepted by the arbitrator or arbitrators, they shall have a period of twenty (20) calendar days to produce an arbitrated decision.

The arbitration proceedings shall take place in Barcelona.

The parties shall be expressly obliged to comply with the arbitrated decision.

For all questions which, for legal reasons, cannot be submitted to arbitration, or, where the arbitration must be legalized, the parties, renouncing all other rights which may apply to them, submit themselves to the courts and tribunals of the city of Barcelona.

The above clause dealing with submission to arbitrational proceedings shall be obligatory for the Exchange Members and optional for the Clients, in accordance with the agreements made in their contracts with Members.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall make available to the Members and Clients a Complaints Book where all complaints made to MEFF RENTA FIJA, either against MEFF RENTA FIJA or against a Member, shall be recorded.
This book, the pages of which shall be previously stamped and numbered by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission, shall be available to said Commission.

TRADING

rend =bo>PRICE QUOTATION SYSTEM AND TRADING

Trading between Members of MEFF RENTA FIJA shall be based on the principles of price unity and transparency of operations, and shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the corresponding Trading Regulations Circular (Circular de Normas de Contratación) .

a Provoke for their own benefit or for that of others artificial price movements.
b Increase the number of transactions unnecessarily and without benefit to the Client.
c Open positions in one or various Contracts on their own account when they have clients which have requested positions in identical or better conditions.
d Close their own positions prior to closing those of their clients, when the clients have ordered the closure of the same position in identical or better conditions.


Information relative to the Exchange, Orders received and prices shall be distributed by the technically appropriate means with the aim of the maximum possible information being available in real time and being accessible under equal conditions for all Members.

All Orders transmitted to MEFF RENTA FIJA shall be firm and shall be binding from the moment they have been accepted by the trading system.

MEFF RENTA FIJA must expressly accept an Order, as it must for execution or cancellation, for such an Order, execution or cancellation to have validity.

Orders may be cancelled at any moment, provided that they have not already been executed.

Orders shall stand only until the end of the session in course or until they are cancelled during the session in course, except for those types of orders for which a different duration is specified.

MEFF RENTA FIJA will ensure that its trading system will process orders in the sequence in which they are received.

When there simultaneously exist two orders, which counter each other, and that can be paired off, these orders shall be executed, giving rise to a Transaction.

ORDER TYPES

The Orders transmitted to MEFF RENTA FIJA must include the following indications:

a Sign of the Order: buy or sell.
b Contract to which the Order refers, that is, Call Option, Put Option or Future.
c Quantity, expressed in the number of entire Contracts.
d Month of Expiration.
e Strike Price and Premium, if an Option.
f Price of the Future, if a Future.
g And, in general whatsoever instructions that may necessary for the Order to be executed correctly.

Orders may be, at least, of the following types: Market, All or None and Combined.

a Market Orders shall have the specifications indicated in the previous part and they shall not be conditional, and they may be executed totally or partially.

b All or None Orders shall be conditional on the order for all, and not just some, of the Contracts being executed.

c Combined Orders shall refer to more than one series of Contracts and shall be conditional on the total and simultaneous execution of all the Orders which make it up.


ORDER MATCHING SYSTEM AND TRANSACTION REGISTRATION

For their execution, an order of priority shall be given to the accepted Orders, in accordance with the following criteria:

a First priority, the best price.
b Second priority, when prices are equal, the oldest standing Order shall be executed first.

c Combined Orders which require simultaneous purchases and/or sales, shall have priority over Market Orders and shall be executed irrespective of the time that the Order has been standing.
This priority may be restricted by Circular.


Once a Transaction has been carried out, it shall be registered on the appropriate Account.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall only register Contracts traded on the Market when the circumstances of article 11. hold, that is, when there simultaneously exist buy and sell Orders on the Market.

Hence, MEFF RENTA FIJA, in its function of Clearing House, will always have the same number of Contracts bought and sold for each Series of Contract.

MEFF RENTA FIJA may accept, for their registration, operations agreed directly between Members of the Exchange, provided that the following three conditions are fulfilled:

a The request for registration is from both Members.

b There exist no discrepancies in the terms of the operation agreed.

c The operation refers to Contracts admitted to trade on the Market.


In the event that the request is accepted, the Transaction shall be registered and shall be fully regulated by these Regulations, in particular as regards the obligation to post Margins, the fulfilment of settlements, and the payment of commissions to MEFF RENTA FIJA.

Prior to the registration of the operation, MEFF RENTA FIJA may require the posting of the corresponding Margin.

Notifications to MEFF RENTA FIJA and registration shall be made in accordance with the regulations published by Circular for this type of operation.

Entries in the registry shall not be modified by MEFF RENTA FIJA, except in order to cancel them at the expiration or settlement of the Contracts and in the following cases:

a Obvious material errors.
b Transfers between Own Accounts of the same Member.
c Transfer of the registry of Contracts to another open account for the same Client with the same Member.
d Transfer of Transactions from one Client to another Client, with both belonging to the same Member.
e Transfer of the registry of all or part of the Contracts included in the Account of a Client due to the transfer to another Account of the same Client but with a different Member, be it at the written request of the Client, or due to the circumstances provided in the present Regulations.
f Modifications due to transfer through inheritance, donation or legal subrogation of all or part of a Client's Account to another.

In any event, MEFF RENTA FIJA may demand any supporting documentation that is deems appropriate in order to carry out the modifications requested.

Except for the modifications of part a), which shall be free of any charge whatsoever, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall levy charges for the modifications that it makes in accordance with the prices published in the commission tariffs.

RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS

The Session Supervisor, whose function is defined in these Regulations, shall make an initial attempt to resolve conflicts arisen in trading, by applying the appropriate Regulations and Norms.

Notification of any disagreement with the Registration of a Transaction must be given to MEFF RENTA FIJA before the beginning of the session of the Business Day following the day on which the Transaction was carried out.

If this is not the case, it shall be understood that there is no disagreement as regards the operations that have been registered, and as shown by MEFF RENTA FIJA's book-entry or registration system.

When Members are not in agreement with the functioning of the Market, or with any Transaction registered on their accounts, the Session Supervisor shall carry out investigations to determine the source of the disagreement.

Once the source of the disagreement has been located, the Supervisor shall determine where the fault lies.
If the error is traced to MEFF RENTA FIJA, the latter will rectify the situation immediately; however, if the error is deemed to stem from the Member, the latter will be invited to verify the situation.
If the Member accepts the decision of the Session Supervisor, the consequences which naturally derive from this must also be accepted; if the decision is not accepted, the conflict shall remain unresolved and the provisions provided below in 13.4. shall be followed.

In the case of dispute, an amicable process will be undertaken with the Supervisor in order to find a solution before the beginning of the following session.
If, in this time, it has not been possible to find a solution, the decision of the Supervisor shall be executed immediately.
It the Member or the Client do not agree with the decision of the Supervisor, they may pursue the appeal process in the following way: By appealing to the Supervision and Vigilance Commission which revises and may modify the decision of the Supervisor.

If, once the decision has been taken by the Supervision and Vigilance Commission, the Member or the Client persist with their appeal, they may submit the question to legal arbitration, under the conditions provided in these Regulations.

In the cases of dispute, the Client or the Member shall be obliged to post, by way of a precaution, the Margin Deposits and to satisfy, also as a precautionary measure, the settlements indicated by MEFF RENTA FIJA, as if the appeal had not taken place.

The Session Supervisor may, following notification to the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission, order the cancellation of Orders when he has sufficient evidence of fraudulent conduct by the party placing the Orders.

DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall distribute information relating to the Market in the following way:

a In real time, through the terminals connected to the central Exchange computer and through professional vendors of financial information.
b Periodically, in the Exchange's Daily Bulletin and in the Press and other Media.

The information distributed in real time shall include at least the following information for each Series of Contract:

a The best bid and offer prices.
b The number of Contracts offered for said prices.
c The price of the last Transaction.
d The accumulated number of Contracts exchanged in the session to a given moment at any price.
e In the case of Futures, the Daily Settlement Price applied at the last Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses, and the highest and lowest prices of the Transactions of the session in course.

TRADING HOURS

The Market trading hours for each Contract shall be approved by the Supervision and Vigilance Commission and shall be proposed by MEFF RENTA FIJA, and shall no begin before 08:00 hours and shall not end after 22:00 hours.
It shall be specified in the General Conditions of each Contract.

In the Expiration Date of each Contract, the trading hours may differ from the normal as specified in the General Conditions.

In exceptional circumstances, and for the benefit or the safeguard of the Exchange's interests, MEFF RENTA FIJA may extend the trading hours previously established, immediately informing the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

BOOK-ENTRY SYSTEM

The Members shall have Own Accounts and Client Accounts, with each account indicating a Commercial Identity, which shall be used as an identification code for each Client.

The Client Accounts and the Own Accounts of the Members show the following at all times:

a the Contracts registered;
b the Premiums for Options pending settlement;
c the Daily Settlements of Gains and Losses accrued:
d the Settlements at Expiration accrued; 
e Margin calls;
f commissions accrued in favour of MEFF RENTA FIJA.

Clients do not have direct access to the Market and, therefore, they may only act through one or more Members.
When Clients wish to operate on the Exchange they must first obtain from a Member a Commercial Identity of each Account that they open, and they must have previously signed the contract with the Member which is described in the Chapter "Clients" of the present Regulations.

Clients may operate through various Members.

Clients which operate on the Market using various Commercial Identities, with one or various Members, may, through a Member, request the use of a Global Account from MEFF RENTA FIJA.
The Member through which the request for the Account was made shall become the Account Holder and shall manage the Account.
The Member under obligation to communicate the sum of the Margins shall be the Account Holder.

MEFF RENTA FIJA may accept or reject the request at its discretion.

For MEFF RENTA FIJA to accept the opening of a Global Account the Member which will act as Account Holder and all the other Members which may have granted the Commercial Identities affected must confirm the request to MEFF RENTA FIJA.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall develop, through Circulars, the functioning of the Global Account system and shall establish the ways in which accounts may be requested.

The Global Account shall jointly list, particularly for the purposes of calculating Margins, all the Contracts registered in the Client Accounts included under the Global Account.

CLEARING AND SETTLEMENT

DAILY SETTLEMENT

Each day MEFF RENTA FIJA shall clear and settle the Transactions carried out on the day of the Exchange, supplying Members with the details and the results of their settlements and, where applicable, those of their Clients.

The settlement instructions shall be available before 10:00 on the Business Day following the date of the Transactions.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall also supply Members with detailed information relating to the state of their accounts, featuring the number of Contracts bought and sold of each Class and Series remaining open, and the sum of the corresponding Margins.

The Members must transmit the pertinent information to their Clients.

The cash settlement of the Transactions shall be carried out within the period following the date of the Transaction specified in the General Conditions of each Contract.
The Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses shall be carried out, in any event, before the beginning of each session of the Business Day following the date of the calculation of the settlement.
On the date of the Settlement of the Transactions, the Members shall pay MEFF RENTA FIJA, or, where applicable, shall receive from MEFF RENTA FIJA, with funds available that day, the sums corresponding to the following items:

a Premiums for Options bought or sold.
b The spread between prices on Closing Futures Transactions.
c The spread between applicable prices for Futures open positions according to the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses.
d Applicable commissions.

Each day, at the close of the Market, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall calculate, for all the Futures open, the Gains and Losses produced in that session, in the following way:

a Futures bought: shall be calculated the difference between the Daily Settlement Price minus the Futures Price. 
b A positive difference shall be a gain and a negative difference shall be a loss.
c Futures sold: shall be calculated the difference between Futures Price minus the Daily Settlement Price. 
d A positive difference shall be a gain and a negative difference shall be a loss.
e Futures bought and sold in the same session: the difference between the sale price and the purchase price shall be calculated. 

A positive difference shall be a gain and a negative difference shall be a loss.

Once the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses has been carried out, the new Price of the Future of all the Futures open shall be the Daily Settlement Price for the day in question.

The way in which the Daily Settlement Price is calculated shall be specified in the General Conditions of each Contract.

Payments to or from the Clients shall be made through the Member which effected the Transaction on behalf of the Client, or through the Account Holder or the Custodian Clearing Member, whichever applies.

Objections to the settlement instructions must be made, where applicable, before the beginning of the session of the Business Day following the day to which they refer.

SETTLEMENT AT CONTRACT EXPIRATION

Following the registration of a Contract, both MEFF RENTA FIJA and the Client, or Member if it is an own position, are obliged to fulfil the Contract.

Settlement at expiration or Exercise of a Contract takes place in the way indicated in the present Regulations and under the General Conditions of each Contract.

Contracts whose General Conditions establish Settlement in Cash on the Settlement Date shall be thus settled.

The procedure that MEFF RENTA FIJA shall follow at the expiration of Options Contracts whose settlement is in cash on the Settlement Date shall be as follows:

- MEFF RENTA FIJA shall determine the Settlement Price at Expiration in the way established in the General Conditions of the Contract.

- In the case of automatic exercise, all those Call Options whose Strike Price is less than the Settlement Price at Expiration shall be automatically executed.
The holders of exercise Options shall receive in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash, and their sellers shall pay in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash.

- In the case of automatic exercise, all those Put Options whose Strike Price is higher than the Settlement Price at Expiration shall be automatically executed.
The holders of exercised Options shall receive in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash, and their sellers shall pay in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash.

- All those Options that have not been exercised at the end of the Expiration Date shall expire worthless.


The procedure that MEFF RENTA FIJA shall follow at the expiration of Futures Contracts whose settlement is in cash shall be the following:

- MEFF RENTA FIJA shall determine the Settlement Price at Expiration in the way established in the General Conditions of each Contract. 

- MEFF RENTA FIJA shall carry out a definitive settlement in cash taking into account the spread between the Settlement Price at Expiration and the last Daily Settlement Price used for the Daily Settlement of Gains and Losses of Futures, or between the Settlement Price at Expiration and the Price of the Future agreed in the Contract if it has been traded in the same session, for all the Futures Contracts which remain open on the Expiration Date.

- The buyers of Futures Contracts whose Price is lower than the Settlement Price at Expiration, and the sellers of Futures Contracts whose Price is higher than the Settlement Price at Expiration, shall receive in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash.

- The sellers of Futures Contracts whose Price is lower than the Settlement Price at Expiration and the buyers of Futures Contracts whose Price is higher than the Settlement Price at Expiration, shall pay in cash the sum corresponding to the Settlement in Cash.


MEFF RENTA FIJA shall notify Members of the settlement instructions as regards all Contracts registered on their accounts which are affected by Settlement in Cash before 17:00 on the Business Day following the Expiration Date.

The settlement instructions shall include the sums to be received or paid corresponding to Settlement in cash and to commissions due to MEFF RENTA FIJA, sums which shall be paid on the Settlement Date.

The Settlement Price at Expiration is made public once trading of the Contract Series in question has ended.

Objections to instructions for settlement at expiration must be made to MEFF RENTA FIJA before 10:00 of the Settlement Date.

In the case of Settlement by Delivery, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall organize the system of delivery and payment such that the conditions for the concerned parties are those agreed in the Contract.
In this way, MEFF RENTA FIJA may determine a Technical Delivery Price which shall be the price at which all the sales/purchases of the Underlying Security are made, paying or charging the difference with respect to the price agreed in cash.
MEFF RENTA FIJA shall give settlement instructions to the Members for all the Contracts registered on their accounts which are affected by the Settlement by Delivery before 17:00 on the Business Day following the Expiration Date or the Exercise Date if different.
The General Conditions shall give sufficient details of this procedure.

The settlement instructions shall include the amounts to be paid or received and the amounts of the Underlying Security to be received or delivered, in addition to the commissions due to MEFF RENTA FIJA.
The payments and deliveries shall be effected on the Settlement Date, subject to the procedures and periods established by the Underlying Security Settlement Service.

In the case of Options Contracts which are settled by delivery, either at expiration or during the life of the Option, the holders of Options must notify MEFF RENTA FIJA through the appropriate channels their desire to exercise the Option.
The General Conditions of each Contract shall determine the means and the period by which this notification should be made.

In the event that on a determined date or on the Exercise Date the number of Options of a particular Series for which MEFF RENTA FIJA receives exercise orders is less than the number of Options issued in that Series, the Contracts to be exercised, and hence the Clients or Members which are obliged to comply with their Contracts, shall be determined by MEFF RENTA FIJA by lottery from all the Contracts affected.

The obligation to deliver or accept delivery of the Underlying Security may be limited to the net difference which results from all the Contracts of the same Class which expire or which have been exercised on the day in question.

SETTLEMENT OF PAYMENTS

The settlement of payments corresponding to the Settlements mentioned in the preceding articles of this Chapter shall be effected by multilateral settlement of the credit and debit balances of each Member.

The settlement of payments shall be effected through charges and payments in the cash accounts opened with the Bank of Spain by the Clearing Members or in the cash accounts which are held in the Bank of Spain by other financial organizations appointed for that purpose.
In this last case, the Clearing Member which appoints another organization to settle payments on their behalf and the appointed organization must notify MEFF RENTA FIJA in writing of this situation.
The organization appointed shall be obliged to accept the charges and payments which are made to it.

The charges and payments mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be for the net balance of all the accounts of each Member.

MEFF RENTA FIJA may arbitrate formulas which ensure the fulfilment of all the payments in the case where there are insufficient funds on any account.
In this case, the appropriate restitution of funds may be imposed through the liquidation of the Margin Deposits which the organization with insufficient funds has posted, through the closure of Contracts registered on the Own Accounts of the Clearing Member, or by obtaining the fund through whatsoever legal channels that MEFF RENTA FIJA deems fit.

MARGINS

ACCEPTED CLASSES AND ASSETS

- Initial Margin, consisting in a permanent guarantee which may be required of Members of the Exchange, at the discretion of MEFF RENTA FIJA, to a maximum sum of 200 million pesetas and under no circumstances shall it be used to discriminate between Members of the same class.

- Daily Margin, consisting in a variable guarantee, dependent on the position taken on the Market, may be required of all Members and Clients of the Market with open Contracts registered on their accounts.
MEFF RENTA FIJA calculates and requires the Daily Margin in the way indicated in these Regulations.

- Extraordinary Margin, consisting in a margin in addition to the Daily Margin, which may be required of the Members and Clients under exceptional Market circumstances or on the basis of positions that MEFF RENTA FIJA considers of high risk.



The Margins shall be under the control and, if applicable, under the ownership, of MEFF RENTA FIJA which may demand their transfer at any time.

The Margins posted in favour of MEFF RENTA FIJA guarantee MEFF RENTA FIJA all the sums which may be owed to MEFF RENTA FIJA by the Client or Member obliged to post them for Exchange Transactions.

The assets accepted as Margins, and their method of constitution, shall be determined by Circular and shall be authorized by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall not be the final beneficiary of the returns which may be yielded by the Margins nor shall it be charged with any costs which are associated with them.

The Custodian Clearing Members may only release the Margins with express authorization from MEFF RENTA FIJA.

In accordance with general regulations of Law, MEFF RENTA FIJA may compensate the cash amounts, expired and due, owed to it by Clients or Members, with the amounts that it owes the Client or Member in question for Premiums, Daily Settlements of Gains and Losses or Settlements at Expiration, and with the amounts that it has received from them for the Margins which must be posted in accordance with the provisions of the present Regulations.

MARGIN CALCULATIONS AND POSTING PROCEDURE

At the moment that MEFF RENTA FIJA registers a Transaction, the intervening Client and Member are obliged to supply MEFF RENTA FIJA with the Margin, in accordance with the provisions of the present Regulations.

The Clearing Members shall be responsible for the posting and maintenance with the appropriate adjustments of the Margins Deposits derived from Transactions carried out on the Market, both for their own account and on behalf of their Clients, and for those derived from Transactions carried out on the Market by other Members with which such an arrangement has been agreed and of which notification has been given to MEFF RENTA FIJA.

The Clearing Member must, in any case, guarantee that the Client or Member for which it has responsibility posts the Margin and, if it does not, it must immediately notify MEFF RENTA FIJA.

The sum of the Daily Margins is fixed by MEFF RENTA FIJA in accordance with provisions of the present Regulations and the General Conditions of each Contract.

Said sum corresponds to the net sum of all the Contracts registered on each Account and shall be required daily.
In the case of a Global Account, all Contracts of all the accounts included in the Global Account shall be included in the overall calculation.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall make available to each Member details of the sums of the Margins for which it is responsible in accordance with the present Regulations at least one hour before the beginning of the session of the day on which the Margins must be supplied.

The Margins must be supplied before the beginning of the session on the Business Day following the date on which the obligation to supply them arose.

The Members may not offset the positions of various Clients or Members for which they are responsible.

For the calculation of the Daily Margin of an Account or of a set of Accounts belonging to the same account holder, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall simulate the total cost of Closing all the Contracts registered for that account holder, by undertaking an analysis of the portfolio.

In the portfolio analysis, the risk of a position shall take into account all the Contracts for which the Underlying Security is the same, such that, with a single variation in the price of the Underlying Security, the price of the Contracts of the portfolio shall change coherently.
Hence, the risk of a portfolio may be less than the sum of the individual risks of each series of Contracts included in the portfolio.

Furthermore, once the closure cost for each Underlying Security has been obtained, if for any of them the simulation results in a positive closing amount, this may be offset against the negative amounts resulting for other Underlying Securities, provided they are in the same portfolio.

The simulation is carried out for a number of prices of the Underlying Security included in the Valuation Interval, the extreme points of which are the highest and lowest prices which it is thought the price of the Underlying Security could reach in a period of time called the Reaction Period, as from the moment of the calculation, taking into account, moreover, possible variations in the implicit volatility of market prices.

The calculation shall be based on recognised valuation models.
The details of the models, the modifications which are made to them, the variation values used in the calculation of the Valuation Interval, the Reaction Period and all the variables which are used in the calculation shall be published by MEFF RENTA FIJA for each Contract in the corresponding Circulars.
The General Conditions of each Contract will specify the models and the variables which must be detailed in the Circulars.

In exceptional cases, MEFF RENTA FIJA may calculate the Daily Margins in a manner different to that described in these Regulations when, in MEFF RENTA FIJA's own opinion, this may be necessary for the safeguard of MEFF RENTA FIJA or of the Exchange.
In these cases: MEFF RENTA FIJA shall immediately inform the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission of the situation, reasonably justifying the reasons which have caused the decision to change the procedures for the calculation of the Margins required.
The Clients and Members shall be obliged to post Daily Margins to the sum that MEFF RENTA FIJA establishes.

LIMITS ON MEMBER AND CLIENT POSITIONS

The limits described in part 4.6. of the present Regulations shall be established by Circular.

The positions for which a Member is responsible may only be, at the most, those which suppose callable Margins equivalent to 40% of the Member's shareholders' equity or to a lower limit established by Circular.

The sum of the Margins posted to the same Custodian Clearing Member may not exceed 40% of the Custodian Clearing Member's shareholders' equity, or any other lower limit established by Circular.
In the case where this limit is reached or is close to being reached, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall notify the affected parties so that they may post their Margins with other Custodian Clearing Member.

With the aim of limiting the concentration of risks in the Market, no Member or Client may hold a position such that the Margins for all the items which may be required by MEFF RENTA FIJA exceed 25% of all the Margins required by MEFF RENTA FIJA from all Members and Clients of the Exchange.
This maximum limit on positions may be exceeded with authorization from MEFF RENTA FIJA.

CRITERIA FOR TAKING PROCEEDINGS WHEN MARGINS ARE NOT POSTED OR ADJUSTED

In the event that a Client or Member fails to fulfil its obligation to post or adjust the Margins callable by MEFF RENTA FIJA, the latter may liquidate, if necessary, the Margins previously posted by the Client or Member.

The mere fact of failing to supply Margin shall be understood as an order to settle all the Contracts registered on the Account, and so MEFF RENTA FIJA shall proceed to Close on the Market said Contracts on behalf of the Member or Client that violates this obligation.

From the moment that the violation is committed, MEFF RENTA FIJA may liquidate the Margins posted by the Client or by the Member, depending on which is the responsible party.

If, as a consequence of the Closing Transaction executed by MEFF RENTA FIJA as a result of a violation, the balance of the Client or Member's account is in its favour, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall release said balance.
If, on the other hand, a negative balance is produced, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall use the sum of the Margin, returning the remainder, if any, to the Client or Member.

If the liquidation of the corresponding Margins is insufficient to cover the negative balance resulting from the closing Transactions, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall initially take responsibility for these against third parties, but it may in any case take action against the responsible party, Client or Member, or both, depending on where the fault lies in accordance with the present Regulations.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall register no Contract on those Accounts for which no margin, in the form and within the period established in the present Regulations, has been posted.

SUPERVISION AND SURVEILLANCE

INFORMATION TO THE SPANISH SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall immediately inform the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission of whatsoever matters or actions which may imply the violation of the regulations which must necessarily be complied with or a departure from the principles on which securities markets regulations are founded.

COMMISSION FOR SUPERVISION AND SURVEILLANCE

The Commission for Supervision and Surveillance shall be formed of a minimum of 5 persons and a maximum of 13.

Two representatives from MEFF RENTA FIJA shall belong permanently to the Commission: the Chief Executive Officer and the Session Supervisor.
The Chairman and the Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by MEFF RENTA FIJA.

The remaining components shall be appointed by the Members such that all the classes of Members shall be adequately represented.

The following shall be functions of the Commission for Supervision and Surveillance:

a Ensure orderly trading.
b Receive a written report, at least once a month, from the Session Supervisor of the conflicts that there have been in the course of trading, in addition to the solutions that have been found.
c To determine the criteria by which the Session Supervisor should interpret the Regulations for the resolution of conflicts, and to ensure, in so far as is possible, that the Supervisor strictly applies the criteria that have been set.
d Resolve trading conflicts which arise after they have been presented to MEFF RENTA FIJA without a solution being reached.
e To ensure that MEFF RENTA FIJA complies with the Exchange Regulations, most particularly in the area of impartiality with regard to access and equal distribution of information.
f To approve the Exchange trading hours.
g To make whatsoever suggestions to MEFF RENTA FIJA that it seems appropriate as regards the functioning of the Exchange, the Contracts which are the object of trading and new proposed Contracts.
h In the cases where it is necessary, the decisions of the Commission shall be published by MEFF RENTA FIJA by means of Exchange Circulars.
The criteria set for the Session Supervisor shall necessarily be published.


SESSION SUPERVISOR

There shall be a person acting as Session Supervisor at all the sessions of the Market.

Only those persons appointed by the Commission for Supervision and Surveillance may act as Session Supervisor.

The Supervisor shall ensure specially that trading is orderly and that the Regulations and other applicable rules are complied with.

The Supervisor shall resolve, in the first instance, any conflicts which may arise in the session, and in so doing shall apply the Regulations, and where applicable, the criteria which have been set by the Commission for Supervision and Surveillance.
The Supervisor, in making a decision, shall, if necessary, use the tape recordings of conversations held during trading and made by MEFF RENTA FIJA, and any pertinent computer records.

The Supervisor may decide to halt trading momentarily and even definitively if, in his or her opinion, this action is necessary to guarantee orderly trading.
For the same reasons, the Supervisor may also decide to extraordinarily extend the session.
In all of these cases, the Supervisor must immediately inform the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

SUSPENSION OF THE MARKET

SUSPENSION OF THE MARKET.

INTERRUPTION OF TRADING

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall suspend the Market when this is required by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.
In this case, the extent and the form of the suspension, in addition to its duration, shall be established in the requirement effected by the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

MEFF RENTA FIJA, giving notification to the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission, may decide to totally or partially suspend the Market for whatsoever period of time that it deems appropriate, The Spanish Securities Exchange Commission may force MEFF RENTA FIJA to lift this suspension.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall not suspend the Market or interrupt trading, expect in cases of force majeure or when it is necessary for the protection of MEFF RENTA FIJA itself, of the Market or of its participants.

The Contracts which are due to expire during the suspension of the Market shall nevertheless expire on their due Date.
However, the settlements and payments which should have been made during the suspension shall be effected on the date that sessions are reopened, unless the settlement could have been effected on the date which was originally due or on a later date, provided that such a time is prior to the reopening.

The suspension of the Market shall in no event suppose any limitation on either the right of MEFF RENTA FIJA to require Margins or on the obligation of Members and Clients to post them.

VIOLATIONS

VIOLATIONS OF MEMBER OBLIGATIONS: SUSPENSION OF FUNCTIONS

When any Member of the Market violates any of the obligations laid out in the present Regulations or in their Contract with MEFF RENTA FIJA, the proceedings provided in the present article shall be applied.

At the moment when MEFF RENTA FIJA comes to know of any violation committed by a Member, that Member shall be immediately informed.
Said Member shall have a period of twenty-four hours from the moment of notification to take action to remedy the violation.
If in this time, the violation is not remedied by the Member, MEFF RENTA FIJA may give notification that their functions are suspended, and, as a consequence, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall not continue to be obliged to said Member to fulfil its obligations in accordance with these Regulations and the Contract signed with the Member in question.
MEFF RENTA FIJA shall immediately inform the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission and the Authority or Organization to which the Member belongs of said suspension.

The suspended Member shall have a period of up to seven (7) Business Days from the suspension to remedy the violation which was the cause of the suspension.
If the violation is not remedied in this time, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall take proceedings to definitively rescind the Contract with the Member.
The rescission of the Contract shall imply the automatic expulsion of the Exchange of the Member in question.

If the violation is committed by a Member with Clients, MEFF RENTA FIJA may transfer to another Member or other Members the positions of the Clients held by the Member committing the violation.
To carry out said transaction, it shall be necessary to obtain an agreement from the Member or Members to whose Accounts the positions shall be transferred and from the Clients to whom the transferal decision also affects.

To request said agreement, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall give notification of the situation and of the desire to transfer, with details of to whom the accounts shall be transferred, by any form of communication, followed by a certified letter to the Members and Clients in question.

A Member which is expelled from the Exchange in the application, of part 28.3. above must fulfil all its obligations and, if it should have Client Accounts, these shall be transferred to another Member.
If the Member does not fulfil its obligations, MEFF RENTA FIJA may liquidate the Deposit Margins or any other Margins that said entity may have posted with MEFF RENTA FIJA.

An expelled Member, which wishes to be readmitted to the Exchange must request admission, justifying fully that the causes which gave rise to its expulsion have been fully remedied and it must have fulfilled all obligations which were pending at the moment of expulsion, and it must also supply all the requisites necessary to become a Member of the Exchange.
Readmission shall involve the signing of a new Contract between MEFF RENTA FIJA and the Member of the Exchange.

If, as a result of an inspection, MEFF RENTA FIJA should discover an alleged violation of the relevant legislation which gives cause for suspension or rescission of a Contract with a Member, the pertinent authorities shall be notified.

LIQUIDATION OF MARGINS AND SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATION

In the event that any Client or Member should fail to fulfil any of its obligations with regard to Transactions carried out on the Market, both at the time of execution of the Contracts, and during the life of the same, MEFF RENTA FIJA may, if necessary, liquidate the Margins posted in order to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations of the Client or Member that is in violation.

In the event that Market settlement be delayed, the Client or Member that causes the delay shall be obliged to pay a fine.
This fine shall be calculated by applying the Madrid Interbank Offered Rate (MIBOR), at its average rate published daily by the Bank of Spain of overnight deposits, plus five percentage points, to the sums which should have been paid, with interest accruing daily for each one of the days that the delay continues.
Furthermore, it shall be responsible for all damages that the delay may have caused.
In any event, it shall also be obliged to pay MEFF RENTA FIJA the commission that MEFF RENTA FIJA sets for these cases in its commission tariffs.

All the provisions in the preceding section shall apply without prejudice to either the liquidation of Margins established in the present Regulations or the use by MEFF RENTA FIJA of the power of suspension and Contract rescission against Members in accordance with the preceding article.

COMMISSIONS

MEFF RENTA FIJA'S COMMISSIONS

For its activities of Market management, MEFF RENTA FIJA shall receive commissions from the Members of the Exchange or from Clients through their Members in relation to the Transactions that each one of them carries out on the Market.

The amounts and other characteristics of said commissions shall be contained in a tariff list that MEFF RENTA FIJA shall publish and which it may modify whenever it deems appropriate.
However, before tariffs, or any modifications thereof, are applied, they shall be submitted to the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission.

MEFF RENTA FIJA shall not receive commissions for services not included in the tariff list, not for amounts other than those indicated on the list.

MEMBERS COMMISSIONS

The Members may charge their Clients, for the services rendered in relation to the Market, commissions and fees which they deem appropriate.
The commission tariff list of each Member must be published and must comply with relevant legislation.

If MEFF RENTA FIJA should expressly request a Member's list of commission tariffs, the latter must send MEFF RENTA FIJA said list.

CONTRACTS

CHARACTERISTICS AND DENOMINATION

The Contracts which may be traded and registered on the Market and their characteristics, contained in the General Conditions of each Contract, must receive the mandatory authorization of the pertinent authorities.

In the case of Contracts whose Underlying Security are Listed Stocks, they must also have the permission of the company which has issued the stocks.

The General Conditions of each Contract shall be included as an appendix to the present Regulations.
In the case of Contracts whose Underlying Security is an index, the General Conditions shall include the regulations of composition and index calculation.

The name of the Contracts shall be established in their General Conditions.

INTRODUCTION OF NEW SERIES

The General Conditions of each Contract shall contain the conditions under which the Series of each Contract shall be introduced for trading.

EXCLUSION OF CONTRACTS FROM TRADING

MEFF RENTA FIJA, for reasons of lack of liquidity or in the general interest of the Market, may decide to exclude contracts from trading.
Under no circumstances shall this action imply the disappearance of the obligations and rights of the open Contracts.

The procedure for the exclusion of contracts from trading shall consist in no new series being introduced to the Market and the continued trading of open Contracts only until their expiration.

Following the granting of authorization from the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission, procedures other than that indicated in the previous part may be followed.
