
Basic Cell Biology: Structure and Function of Genes and Chromosomes

All genetic diseases involve defects at the level of the cell.
For this reason one must understand basic cell biology to understand genetic disease.
Errors may occur in the replication of genetic material or in the translation of genes into proteins.
These errors commonly produce single-gene disorders.
In addition, errors occurring during cell division can lead to disorders involving entire chromosomes.
To provide the basis for understanding these errors and their consequences, this chapter focuses on the processes through which genes are replicated and translated into proteins, as well as the process of cell division.

In the nineteenth century, microscopic studies of cells led scientists to suspect that the nucleus of the cell (Fig., 2-1) contained the important mechanisms of inheritance.
They found that chromatin , the substance that gives the nucleus a granular appearance, is observable in the nuclei of non-dividing cells.
Just before a cell undergoes division, the chromatin condenses to form discrete, dark-staining bodies, called chromosomes (from the Greek for "colored bodies").
With the rediscovery of Mendel's breeding experiments at the beginning of this century, it soon became apparent that chromosomes contained genes .
Genes are transmitted from parent to offspring and are considered to be the basic unit of inheritance.
It is through the transmission of genes that physical traits, such as eye color, are inherited in families.
Diseases can also be transmitted through genetic inheritance.

Physically genes are composed of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) .
DNA provides the genetic "blueprint" for all proteins in the body.
Thus genes ultimately influence all aspects of body structure and function.
The human is estimated to have 50,000 to 100,000 structural genes (genes that code for proteins).
An error (or mutation )in one of these genes often leads to a recognizable genetic disease.
To date approximately 5700 single-gene traits have been identified; most of these represent disease conditions (see Table 1-1).

Genes, the basic unit of inheritance, are contained in chromosomes and consist of DNA.

Each human somatic cell (cells other than the gametes , or sperm and egg cells) contains 23 pairs of different chromosomes, for a total of 46. 
One member of each pair is derived from one's father, while the other member is derived from one's mother.
One of the chromosome pairs consists of the sex chromosomes .
In normal males the sex chromosomes are a Y chromosome inherited from the father and an X chromosome inherited from the mother.
Two X chromosomes are found in normal females, one inherited from each parent.
The other 22 pairs of chromosomes are termed autosomes .
The members of each pair of autosomes are said to be homologs , or homologous , because their DNA is very similar.
The X and Y chromosomes are not homologs of one another.

Somatic cells, having two of each chromosome, are termed diploid cells.
Gametes have the haploid number of chromosomes, 23.
The diploid number of chromosomes is maintained in successive generations of somatic cells by the process of mitosis , whereas the haploid number is obtained through a process known as meiosis .
Both of these processes will be discussed in detail in the latter part of this chapter.

Somatic cells are diploid, having 23 pairs of chromosomes (22 autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes).
Gametes are haploid and have a total of 23 chromosomes.

Figure 2-1

The anatomy of the cell

See color plate 1

DNA, RNA, AND PROTEINS: HEREDITY AT THE MOLECULAR LEVEL DNA

Composition and Structure of DNA

The DNA molecule has three basic components: the pentose sugar, deoxyribose; a phosphate group; and four types of nitrogenous bases (so named because they can combine with hydrogen ions in acidic solutions).
Two of the bases, cytosine and thymine , are single carbon-nitrogen rings called pyrimidines .
The other two bases, adenine and guanine , are double carbon-nitrogen rings called purines (Fig., 2-2).
The four bases are commonly represented by their first letters: C, T, A, and G.

One of Watson and Crick's contributions was to demonstrate how these three components are physically assembled to form DNA. 
They proposed the now-famous double helix model, in which DNA can be envisioned as a twisted ladder with chemical bonds as its rungs (Fig., 2-3).
The two sides of the ladder are composed of the sugar and phosphate components, held together by strong phosphodiester bonds.
Projecting from each side of the ladder, at regular intervals, are the nitrogenous bases.
The base projecting from one side is bound to the base projecting from the other by a relatively weak hydrogen bond.
The paired nitrogenous bases therefore form the rungs of the ladder.

Figure 2-3 (page 10) illustrates the chemical bonds between bases and shows that ends of the ladder terminate in either 3' or 5'.
These labels are derived from the order in which the five carbon atoms composing deoxyribose are numbered.

Each DNA subunit, consisting of one deoxyribose, one phosphate group, and one base, is called a nucleotide .

As we shall see, different sequences of nucleotide bases (e.g., xxx ) specify different proteins.
Specification of the body's many proteins must require a great deal of genetic information.
Indeed, each human cell contains approximately 3 billion nucleotides, more than enough information to specify the composition of all of our proteins.

The most important constituent of DNA is the four nucleotide bases, adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine. 
DNA has a double helix structure.

Figure 2-2

Chemical structure of the four bases, showing hydrogen bonds between base pairs

Three hydrogen bonds are formed between cytosine-guanine pairs, and two bonds are formed between adenine-thymine pairs 

Replication of DNA

As cells divide to make copies of themselves, identical copies of DNA must be made and incorporated into the new cells. 
This is essential if DNA is to serve as the basic genetic material.
DNA replication consists basically of the breaking of the weak hydrogen bonds between the bases, leaving a single DNA strand with each base unpaired.
The consistent pairing of adenine with thymine and guanine with cytosine, known as complementary base pairing , is the key to accurate replication.
The principle of complementary base pairing dictates that the unpaired base will attract a free nucleotide only if the nucleotide has the proper complementary base.
Thus a portion of a single strand with the base sequence xxx will bond with a series of free nucleotides with the bases xxx .
The single strand is said to be a template upon which a complementary strand is built.
When replication is complete, a new double-stranded molecule identical to the original is formed (Fig., 2-4, page 10).

Several different enzymes are involved in DNA replication. 
One enzyme unwinds the double helix, one holds the strands apart, and others perform other distinct functions.
DNA polymerase is one of the key replication enzymes.
It travels along the single DNA strand, adding free nucleotides to the 3'end of the new strand.
Nucleotides can be added only to this end of the strand, so replication always proceeds from the 5'to the 3' end.
When referring to the orientation of sequences along a gene, the 5'direction is termed "upstream," whereas the 3' direction is termed "downstream.

Figure 2-3

The DNA double helix, with sugar-phosphate backbone and nitrogenous bases

Figure 2-4

DNA replication.

The hydrogen bonds between the two original strands are broken, allowing the bases in each strand to undergo complementary base pairing with free bases.
This process, which procceds 5' to 3' on each strand, forms two new double strands of DNA 

In addition to adding new nucleotides, DNA polymerase performs part of a proofreading procedure, in which a newly added nucleotide is checked to make certain that it is in fact complementary to the template base.

If not, the nucleotide is excised and replaced with a correct complementary nucleotide base.
This process substantially enhances the accuracy of DNA replication.
When a DNA replication error is not successfully repaired, a mutation has occurred. 
As will be seen in Chapter 3, many such mutations cause genetic diseases.

DNA replication is critically dependent upon the principle of complementary base pairing.
This allows a single strand of the doubles-stranded DNA molecule to form a template for the synthesis of a new, complementary strand. 

Figure 2-5

Replication bubbles form at multiple points along the DNA strand, allowing replication to proceed more rapidly

The rate of DNA replication in humans, about 40 to 50 nucleotides per second, is comparatively slow.
In bacteria the rate is mach higher, reaching 500 to 1000 nucleotides per second.
Given that so m e human chromosomes have as m any as 250 million nucleotides, replication would be an extraordinarily time-consuming process if it proceeded linearly from one end of the chromosome to the other (for a chromosome of this size, a single round of replication would require nearly 2 months). 
Instead replication begins at many different points along the chromosome, termed replication origins .
The resulting multiple separations of the DNA strands are cal led replication bubbles (Fig., 2-5). 
By occurring simultaneously at many different sites along the chromosome, the replication process can proceed mach more quickly.

Replication bubbles allow DNA replication to take place at multiple locations on the chromosome, greatly speeding the replication process.

From Genes to Proteins

While DNA is formed and replicated in the cell nucleus, protein synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm.
The information contained in DNA must thus be transported somehow to the cytoplasm and then used to dictate the composition of proteins.
This involves two processes, transcription and translation .
Briefly the DNA code is transcribed into messenger RNA, which then leaves the nucleus to be translated into proteins.
These processes, summarized in Figure 2-6, will be discussed at length herein.
Transcription and translation are both mediated by ribonucleic acid (RNA) , a type of nucleic acid that is chemically similar to DNA. 
Like DNA, RNA is composed of sugars, phosphate groups, and nitrogenous bases.
It differs from DNA in that the sugar is ribose instead of deoxyribose and in that uracil rather than thymine is one of the four bases.
Uracil is structurally similar to thymine, so, like thymine, it can pair with adenine. 
Another difference between RNA and DNA is that whereas DNA usually occurs as a double strand, RNA usually occurs as a single strand.

Figure 2-6

A summary of the steps leading from DNA to proteins

Replication and transcription occur in the cell nucleus, after which the mRNA is transported to the cytoplasm, where translation of the mRNA into amino acid sequences composing a protein occurs

DNA sequences encode proteins through the processes of transcription and translation.
These both involve ribonucleic acid, a single-stranded molecule similar to DNA except that it has a ribose sugar and has a uracil base rather than thymine. 

Figure 2-7

Transcription of DNA to mRNA 

RNA polymerase 11 proceeds along the DNA strand in the 3' to 5' direction, assembling a strand of mRNA nucleotides that is complementary to the DNA template strand

Genetic Variation: Its Origin and Detection

Humans display a remarkable degree of genetic variation. 
This is seen in traits such as height, blood pressure, and skin color.
Included in the spectrum of genetic variation are disease states, such as cystic fibrosis or type 1 neurofibromatosis (see Chapter 4).
This aspect of genetic variation is the focus of medical genetics.

All genetic variation originates from the process known as mutation , which is defined as a change in DNA sequence.
Mutations can affect either somatic or germline cells (cells that produce gametes). 
Mutations in somatic cells (all cells other than germline cells) can lead to cancer and are thus of significant concern.
However, our attention in this chapter will be directed primarily to germline mutations because these can be transmitted from one generation to the next.

As a result of mutations, a gene may differ among individuals in terms of its DNA sequence.
The differing sequences are referred to as alleles .
A gene's location on a chromosome is termed a locus (from the Latin for "place").
Thus we might say that an individual has a certain allele at the, B-globin locus on chromosome 11.
If an individual has the same allele on both members of a chromosome pair, he or she is said to be a homozygote .
If the alleles differ in DNA sequence, the individual is a heterozygote .
The alleles that are present at a given locus are referred to as the individual's genotype .

Some loci (plural of locus) vary considerably among individuals.
If a locus has two or more alleles, the frequencies of which each exceed 1% in a population, the locus is said to be polymorphic ("many forms"). 
The polymorphic locus is often termed a polymorphism .

In this chapter we examine mutation as the source of genetic variation.
We discuss the different types of mutations, as well as the causes and consequences of mutation.
In addition, we discuss biochemical and molecular techniques that are now used to detect genetic variation in human populations. 

MUTATION: THE SOURCE OF GENETIC VARIATION 

Types of Mutation

Some mutations consist of an alteration of the number or structure of chromosomes in a cell.
These major chromosome abnormalities can be observed microscopically and are the subject of Chapter 6.
Here we focus on mutations that affect only single genes and are not microscopically observable.
Most of our discussion centers on mutations that take place in coding DNA or in regulatory sequences because mutations occurring in other parts of the genome usually have no clinical consequences. 

One important type of single-gene mutation is the base pair substitution , in which one base pair is replaced by another [1] .
This can result in a change in amino acid sequence, although, because of the redundancy of the genetic code, many of these mutations do not change the amino acid sequence and thus have no consequence.
The latter are called silent substitutions .
Nonsilent base pair substitutions consist of two basic types:
missense mutations produce a change in a single amino acid, whereas nonsense mutations produce one of the three stop codons in the mRNA: xxx , xxx , or xxx (Fig., 3-1, A, B).
These codons terminate translation of the mRNA and thus result in a premature termination of the polypeptide chain.
Conversely when a stop codon is altered so that it encodes an amino acid, an abnormally elongated polypeptide is produced.
Alterations of amino acid sequences can have profound consequences.
Many of the serious genetic diseases to be discussed later are the result of base pair substitutions. 

[1] In molecular genetics, base pair substitutions are also termed point mutations.
The latter term, however, was used in classical genetics to denote any mutation small enough to be unobservable under a microscope. 

Figure 3-1

Missense mutations (A) produce a single amino acid change, whereas nonsense mutations (B)produce a stop codon in the mRNA

Stop codons terminate translation of the polypeptide. 

Figure 3-2

Frameshift mutations result from the insertion or deletion of a number of bases (not a multiple of 3)

This alters all of the codons downstream from the site of insertion or deletion

A second major type of mutation consists of deletions or insertions of one or more base pairs.
These mutations, which can produce extra or missing amino acids in a protein, are often detrimental.
An example of such a mutation is a 3-bp deletion that causes most cases of cystic fibrosis seen in whites (see Chapter 4 for further details).
Deletions and insertions tend to be especially harmful when the number of missing or extra base pairs is not a multiple of three.
Because codons consist of groups of 3 bp, such insertions or deletions can alter all of the downstream codons.
For example, a single-base insertion (an A in the second codon)could convert a sequence read as xxx to xxx .
This would convert an amino acid sequence from xxx to xxx .
These mutations, illustrated further in Figure 3-2, are known as frameshift mutations. 

Other types of mutations can alter the regulation of transcription or translation.
A promoter mutation can decrease the affinity of RNA polymerase for a promoter site, often resulting in reduced production of mRNA.
The final result is decreased production of a particular protein.
Enhancer mutations can have similar effects.

Mutations may also interfere with the splicing of introns as mature mRNA is formed from the primary mRNA transcript.
Splice site mutations , occurring at intron-exon boundaries, alter the splicing signal necessary for proper excision of an intron.
These may occur at the GT sequence that always defines the 5' donor site or at the AG sequence that defines the 3' acceptor site .
They may also occur in the sequences that lie near the donor and acceptor sites; i.,e., the consensus sequences defined in Chapter 2.
When such mutations take place, the excision will often take place within the next exon, at a splice site located in the exon.
These splice sites, the DNA sequences of which differ slightly from those of normal splice sites, are ordinarily unused and "hidden" within the exon and thus termed cryptic splice sites .
The use of a cryptic site for splicing results in partial deletion of the exon.
In other cases an entire exon can be deleted.
As Figure 3-3 shows, splice site mutations can also result in the abnormal inclusion of part or all of an intron in the mature mRNA.
It is also possible for a mutation to occur at a cryptic splice site, causing it to appear as a normal splice site, thus competing with the normal splice site.

Figure 3-3

In the first splice site mutation shown here (B), the donor sequence, GT, is replaced with AT

This results in an incorrect splice that leaves part of the intron in the mature mRNA transcript.
In the second mutation (C), a second GT donor site is crested in the first intron, resulting in a combination of abnormally and normally spliced mRNA products

There are several types of DNA sequences that are capable of propagating copies of themselves; these copies are then inserted in other locations on chromosomes.
The insertion of these transposons (or mobile elements ) can cause frameshift mutations.
Until recently, it was not clear whether this phenomenon, which has been well documented in experimental animals such as fruit flies, occurred in humans.
The insertion of mobile elements has now been shown to cause isolated cases of type 1 neurofibromatosis and hemophilia A (a clotting disorder) in humans.

The final type of mutation to be considered here has been discovered recently and affects tandem repeated DNA sequences (see Chapter 2) that occur within or near certain disease genes. 
A normal individual will have a relatively small number of these tandem repeats (e.,g., 20 to 40).
For reasons that are not yet understood, the number of repeats can increase dramatically during meiosis or possibly during early fetal development, so that a newborn may have hundreds or even thousands of repeats. 
When this occurs in certain regions of the genome, it causes genetic disease.
Like other mutations, these expanded repeats can be transmitted to the patient's offspring. 
At least seven genetic diseases are now known to be caused by expanded repeats.
These will be discussed further in Chapter 4.

Mutations are the ultimate source of genetic variation.
Some mutations result in genetic disease, whereas others have no physical effects.

The principal types of mutations include missense, nonsense, frameshift, promoter, and splice site mutations.
There is also evidence for mutations caused by the random insertion of mobile elements, and several genetic diseases are known to be caused by expanded repeats.

Clinical Consequences of Mutation: The Hemoglobin Disorders

Genetic disorders of human hemoglobin are the most common group of single-gene disorders:
an estimated 5% of the world's population carries one or more mutations of the genes involved in hemoglobin synthesis.
Because all of the types of mutation described in this chapter have been observed in the hemoglobin disorders, these disorders serve as an important illustration of the clinical consequences of mutation.

The hemoglobin molecule is a tetramer composed of four polypeptide chains, two of which are labeled a and two of which are labeled ,B.
The chains are encoded by a gene on chromosome 11, and the a chains are encoded by two genes on chromosome 16 that are similar to one another.
A normal individual would thus have two normal ,l3 genes and four normal a genes (Fig., 3-4).
Ordinarily, tight regulation of these genes ensures that roughly equal numbers of a and B chains are produced.
Each of these globin chains is associated with a heme group, which contains an iron atom and binds with oxygen.
This property allows hemoglobin to perform the vital function of transporting oxygen in red blood cells.

The hemoglobin disorders can be classified into two broad categories: structural abnormalities, in which the hemoglobin molecule is altered, and thalassemias, a group of conditions in which the hemoglobin is structurally normal but reduced in quantity.
Another condition, hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH), occurs when fetal hemoglobin, encoded by the A-globin genes and by two ,B-globin-like genes called Ag and Gg (Fig., 3-4),continues to be produced after birth (normally, g-chain production ceases and B-chain production begins at the time of birth).
HPFH does not cause disease but instead can compensate for a lack of normal adult hemoglobin.
It is not discussed further here.

Sickle Cell Disease

A large array of different hemoglobin disorders have been identified.
The discussion that follows is a greatly simplified presentation of the major forms of these disorders.
The hemoglobin disorders, the mutations that cause them, and their major features are summarized in Table 3-1.

Figure 3-4

The A-globin gene cluster on chromosome 16 and the B-globin gene cluster on chromosome 11. 

The ,B-globin cluster includes thee-globin gene that encodes embryonic globin and the g-globin genes that encode fetal globin.
The W0 1 and d genes are not expressed. 
The A-globin cluster includes the d-globin gene, which encodes embryonic A-globin.

The most important of the structural hemoglobin abnormalities is sickle cell disease, a disorder that affects approximately 1 in 400 to 600 African- American births (SOL 5-8).
It is even more common in parts of Africa, where it can affect up to one in 50 births, and it is also seen occasionally in Mediterranean and Mideastern populations.
Sickle cell disease is caused by a single missense mutation that effects a substitution of valine for glutamic acid at position six of the ,B-globin chain. 
In homozygous form this amino acid substitution alters the characteristics of the hemoglobin molecule such that the erythrocytes (red blood cells) assume a characteristic "sickle" shape (Fig., 3-5,A) under conditions of low oxygen tension.
These conditions are experienced in capillaries, the tiny vessels whose diameter is smaller than that of the erythrocyte. 
Normal erythrocytes (Fig., 3-5,B) can squeeze through capillaries, but sickled erythrocytes are less flexible and are unable to do so.
The resultant vascular obstruction produces localized hypoxia (lack of oxygen), painful sickling "crises," and infarctions of various tissues, including bone, spleen, kidneys, and lungs (an infarction is a destruction of tissue).
Premature destruction of the sickled erythrocytes decreases the number of circulating erythrocytes and the hemoglobin level, producing anemia .
The spleen becomes enlarged ( splenomegaly ), but infarctions eventually destroy this organ, producing some loss of immune function.
This contributes to the recurrent bacterial infections (especially pneumonia) that are commonly seen individuals with sickle cell disease and that frequently cause death.
In North America it is estimated that about 15% of children with sickle cell disease die before the age of 5.

Sickle cell disease, which causes anemia, tissue infarctions, and multiple infections, is the result of a single missense mutation that produces an amino acid substitution in the ,B-globin chain.

Thalassemia

The term thalassemia is derived from the Greek word for "sea," thalassa .
This refers to the fact that thalassemia was first described in populations living near the Mediterranean Sea, although it is also common in portions of Africa, the Mideast, India, and Southeast Asia.
Thalassemia can be divided into two major groups, A-thalassemia and ,B-thalassemia, depending on the chain that is reduced in quantity.
When one type of chain is decreased in number, the other chain type, unable to participate in normal tetramer formation, tends to form molecules consisting of four chains of the excess type only (these are termed homotetramers , in contrast to the heterotetramers normally formed by A and B chains).
In A- thalassemia the A-globin chains are deficient, so the B chains (or y chains in the fetus) are found in excess.
They form homotetramers that have a greatly reduced oxygen-binding capacity, producing anemia.
In B-thalassemia the excess A-chains form homotetramers that precipitate and damage the cell membranes of red cell precursors (i.,e., the cells that form circulating erythrocytes).
This leads to premature erythrocyte destruction and anemia.

Most cases of A-thalassemia are caused by deletions of the A-globin genes.
A loss of one or two of these genes has no clinical effect.
The loss or abnormality of three of the A genes produces moderately severe anemia and splenomegaly (Hb H disease).
Loss of all four A genes, a condition seen primarily among Southeast Asians, produces hypoxia in the fetus and hydrops fetalis (a condition in which there is a massive buildup of fluid; SOL 52).

Severe hypoxia invariably causes stillbirth or neonatal death.

Table 3-1

Summary of the hemoglobin disorders 

Disease.
Mutation type.
Major disease features.


Sickle cell disease.
B-globin missense mutation.
Anemia, tissue infarctions, infections.


Hb Hdisease.
Deletion or abnormality of 3 of the 4 A- globin genes.
Moderately severe anemia, splenomegaly.


Hydrops fetalis .
Deletion or abnormality of all 4 A-globin genes .
Severe hypoxia, congestive heart failure; stillbirth or neonatal death.


B-thalassemia.
Usually nonsense, frameshift, or splice site donor or acceptor mutations; no B-globin produced.
Severe anemia, splenomegaly, skeletal abnormalities, infections; often fatal during first decade if untreated.


B'-thalassemia.
Usually missense, regulatory, or splice site consensus sequence or cryptic splice site mutations; small amount of B- globin produced .
Features similar to those of B' thalassemia but often somewhat milder.


The A-thalassemia conditions are usually caused by deletions of A-globin genes.
The loss of three of these genes leads to moderately severe anemia, and the loss of all four is fatal.

Individuals with a B -globin mutation on one copy of chromosome 11 (heterozygotes) are said to have , B - thalassemia minor, a condition that involves little or no anemia and does not ordinarily require clinical management.
Those in whom both copies of the chromosome carry a p -globin mutation develop , B -thalassemia major (also called Cooley's anemia) or the less serious condition, B-thalassemia intermedia.
B -globin may be completely absent ( B '-thalassemia) or reduced to about 10% to 30% of the normal amount ( B '-thalassemia).

Because B -globin is not produced until after birth, , B -thalassemia major is not seen clinically until the age of 2 to 6 months.
These patients develop severe anemia.
If untreated, substantial growth retardation can occur.
The anemia causes bone marrow expansion, which in turn produces skeletal changes, including protuberant upper jaws and cheekbones and thinning of the long bones (making them susceptible to fracture).

Splenomegaly (Fig., 3-6) and infections are common, and untreated , B -thalassemia major patients often die during the first decade of life. p-thalassemia can vary considerably in severity, depending on the precise nature of the responsible mutation.

Figure 3-5

Erythrocytes from sickle cell patients assume a characteristic shape under conditions of low oxygen tension (A)

Compare with normal erythrocytes (B)

In contrast to A -thalassemia, gene deletions are relatively rare in B -thalassemia.
Instead most cases are caused by single-base mutations.
Nonsense mutations, which result in premature termination of translation of the , B chain, usually produce , B '-thalassemia.
Frameshift mutations also typically produce the p ° form.
In addition to mutations in the B -globin gene itself, alterations in regulatory sequences are often seen. 

B -globin transcription is regulated by a promoter, two enhancers, and an upstream region known as the locus control region ( LCR , Fig., 3-4).
Mutations in these regulatory regions usually result in reduced synthesis of mRNA and a reduction, but not complete absence, of B-globin (B'-thalassemia).
Several types of splice site mutations have also been observed. 

When a point mutation occurs at the donor or acceptor sites, normal splicing is destroyed completely, producing B° -thalassemia.
Mutations in the surrounding consensus sequences usually produce , B' - thalassemia. 
Mutations also occur in the cryptic splice sites found in introns or exons of, the , B -globin gene, causing these sites to be available to the splicing mechanism. 
These additional splice sites then compete with the normal splice sites, producing some normal and some abnormal , B -globin chains.
The result is usually B '- thalassemia.

Many different types of mutations can produce , B -thalassemia conditions.
Nonsense, frameshift, and splice site donor and acceptor mutations tend to produce more severe disease.
Regulatory mutations and those involving splice site consensus sequences and cryptic splice sites tend to produce less severe disease.

More than 100 different , B -globin mutations have been reported.
Consequently most , B -thalassemia patients are not "homozygotes" in the strict sense:
they usually have a different , B -globin matation on each copy of chromosome 11 and are termed compound heterozygotes .
Even though the mutations differ, each of the two , B -globin genes is altered, producing a disease state. 
It is common to apply the term "homozygote" loosely to compound heterezygotes.

Sickle cell and , B -thalassemia major patients are sometimes treated with blood transfusions and with chelating agents that remove excess iron introduced by the transfusions. 
Prophylactic administration of antibiotics and antipneumococcal vaccination are now being advocated as ways to diminish bacterial infections in sickle cell disease patients, and analgesics are administered for pain relief during sickling crises.
Bone marrow transplants, which provide donor stem cells that produce genetically normal erythrocytes, have been performed on patients with severe p -thalassemia and sickle cell disease.
However, the mortality rate from these transplants is still fairly high (approximately 10% to 20%).
The hemoglobin disorders are a possible candidate for gene therapy (see Chapter 11).

Causes of Mutation

A large number of agents are known to cause induced mutations .
These mutations, which can be attributed to a known environmental cause, can be contrasted with spontaneous mutations , which arise naturally during the process of DNA replication.

Agents that cause induced mutations are known collectively as mutagens .
Animal studies have shown that radiation is an important class of mutagen. 

Figure 3-6

A child with B -thalassemia major who has severe splenomegaly

Gene Mapping

The mapping of genes to specific locations on chromosomes is a central focus of medical genetics.
Dramatic advances in molecular genetic technology, coupled with important developments in the statistical analysis of genetic data, have greatly increased the rate at which genes are being mapped (Fig., 7-1 ) Currently, protein-coding genes are being mapped at the rate of about one per day, and nearly 3000 such genes have been assigned to chromosome locations.

Although this is an admirable rate of progress, this number represents only a small fraction of the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes that compose the human genome.
Clearly a great deal of work remains to be done.
One goal of the Human Genome Project, discussed below, is to map all of our genes to specific chromosome locations.
As this work progresses, our understanding of the biologic basis of genetic disease will surely progress as well.

Gene mapping is a critical step in the understanding, diagnosis, and eventual treatment of a genetic disease.
When a disease gene's location is pinpointed, it is often possible to provide a more accurate prognosis for individuals at risk for a genetic disease.
Locating a disease gene is also often necessary to clone the gene.
Once a gene is cloned, its DNA sequence and protein product can be studied.
This can contribute to our understanding of the actual cause of the disease.
Furthermore it opens the way to the manufacture of a normal gene product through recombinant DNA techniques, permitting more effective treatment of many genetic diseases.
Gene therapy, the insertion of norm al genes into the bodies of individuals affected with a genetic disease, also becomes a possibility. 
Thus gene mapping contributes directly to many of the primary goals of medical genetics.

In this chapter we discuss the approaches commonly used in gene mapping.
Two major types of gene mapping can be distinguished.
In genetic mapping , the frequency of meiotic crossovers between loci is used to determine interlocus distances.
Physical mapping involves the use of cytogenetic and molecular techniques to determine the actual physical location of genes on chromosomes.
In addition to discussing mapping procedures, we see how these techniques lead to more accurate prediction of disease risk in families and how they lead to the isolation and cloning of disease genes.

Figure 7-1

The number of coding genes mapped to specific chromosome locations

GENETIC MAPPING

Linkage Analysis

One of Gregor Mendel's laws, the principle of independent assortment, states that an individual's genes will be transmitted to the next generation independently of one another (Chapter 4).
Mendel was not aware that genes are located on chromosomes and that genes located near one another on the same chromosome are transmitted together, not independently.
Thus Mendel's principle of independent assortment holds true for most pairs of loci, but not those that occupy the same region of a chromosome. 
Such loci are said to be linked .

Figure 7-2 depicts two loci, A and B that are located close together on the same chromosome.
A third locus, C, is located on another chromosome.
In the individual in our example, each of these loci has two alleles, designated 1 and 2.
A and B are linked, so A, and B, are inherited together. 
Because A and C are on different chromosomes and thus unlinked, their alleles do follow the principle of independent assortment.
Hence, if the process of meiosis places A, in a gamete, the probability that C/ will be found in the same gamete is 50%.

Recall from Chapter 2 that homologous chromosomes sometimes exchange portions of their DNA during prophase I (crossing over, or crossover).
The average chromosome will experience one to three crossover events during meiosis.
As a result of crossover, new combinations of alleles can be formed on a chromosome.

Consider the linked loci, A and B discussed above.
Alleles A, and B, are located together on one chromosome, and alleles A2 and B2 are located on the homologous chromosome.
The combination of alleles on each chromosome is termed a haplotype (from "haploid genotype").
The two haplotypes of this individual are denoted as A,B,/A2B2 .
As Figure 7-3, A shows, A,B, is found in one gamete and A2B2 is found in the other gamete in the absence of crossover.

When there is a crossover, new allele combinations, A,B2 and A2B" are found in each gamete (Fig., 7-3, B).
The process of forming such new arrangements of alleles is called recombination .
Crossover does not necessarily lead to recombination, however, because a double crossover can occur between two loci, resulting in no recombination (Fig., 7-3, C).

As Figure 7-4 shows, crossovers are more likely to occur between loci that are situated far apart on a chromosome than between loci that are situated close together.
Thus the distance between two loci can be inferred by estimating how frequently recombinations occur in families (this is called the recombination frequency ).
If, in a large series of meioses studied in families, the alleles of A and B undergo recombination 5% of the time, then the recombination frequency for A and B would be 5%.

Figure 7-2

Loci A and s are linked on the same chromosome, so alleles Al and B, are usually inherited together 

Locus C is on a different chromosome, so it is not linked to A and B, and its alleles are transmitted independently of the alleles of A and B.

Figure 7-3

The genetic results of crossover 

A, No crossover: Al and s, remain together after meiosis; B, A crossover between A and s results in a recombination: A1 and s2 are inherited together on a chromosome,and A2 and Bl are inherited together on another chromosome; C, A double crossover between A and B results in no recombination of alleles.

The genetic distance between two loci is measured in centiMorgans (cM) , in honor of T.H. Morgan, who discovered the process of crossing over in 1910.
1 cM is approximately equal to a recombination frequency of 1%.
The relationship between recombination frequency and centiMorgans is approximate because double crossovers produce no recombination.
The recombination frequency thus underestimates map distance, especially as the recombination frequency increases above 5% to 10%.
Mapping functions have been devised to correct for this underestimate. 

Loci that are on the same chromosome are said to be syntenic ("same thread").
If two syntenic loci are 50 cM apart, they are considered to be un linked.
This is because their recombination frequency is just as large as if they were on different chromosomes.

Crossovers between loci on the same chromosome can produce recombination.
Loci on the same chromosome that experience recombination less than 50% of the time are said to be linked.
The distance between loci can be expressed in centiMorgans; 1 cM represents a recombination frequency of approximately 1%.

Recombination frequencies can be estimated by observing the transmission of genes in pedigrees.
Figure 7-5, A is an example of a pedigree in which neurofibromatosis type 1 (NFI) is being transmitted.
The members of this pedigree have also been typed for a two-allele RFLP termed 1F1O, which, like the NF1 gene, is located on chromosome 17.
The 1F1 O genotypes are shown below each individual in the pedigree. 
Examination of generations 1 and 2 allows us to determine that the NFI gene must be on the same chromosome as allele 1 of the IFIO system in this family because individual 1-2, who is homozygous for allele 2, is unaffected with the disease.
The arrangement of these alleles on each chromosome is referred to as linkage phase .

Knowing the linkage phase, individual 11-2's haplotypes would then be Nl/n2 , where N indicates the allele causing NF1, n indicates the normal allele, and 1 and 2 are the two 1F1O alleles.
This woman's husband (individual II-l) is unaffected with the disease and is a homozygote for allele 2 at 1F1 O.
He must have the haplotypes n2/n2 .
Because the NF1 and 1F1 O loci are linked, the children of this union who are affected with NF 1 should usually have 1F1 O allele 1, whereas those who are unaffected should have allele 2.
In seven of eight children in generation 3, we find this to be true.
In one case a recombination occurred (individual 111-6).
This gives a recombination frequency of l/8 = l 2.5%.
In actual practice a much larger sample of families would be used to ensure statistical accuracy of this result (if this were done, it would show that 1F1 O and NF1 are in fact much more closely linked than indicated by this example, with a recombination frequency less than l %).

Figure 7-4

Crossover is more likely between loci that are far apart on chromosomes (left) than when they are close together (right)

Estimates of recombination frequencies are obtained by observing the transmission of alleles in families. 
Determination of the linkage phase (i.e., the chromosome on which each allele is located) is an important part of this procedure.

Polymorphisms such as 1F1 O, which can be used to follow a disease gene through a family, are termed markers .
Because linked markers can be typed in an individual of any age (even in a fetus), they are useful for the early diagnosis of genetic disease (see Chapter 11).

In general, l cM corresponds to approximately I million bp ( l Mb) of DNA.

However, this is only an approximate relationship because several factors are known to influence crossover rates.
First, crossovers are roughly l,5 times more common in female meiosis (oogenesis) than in male meiosis spermatogenesis).

Also, crossovers tend to be more common near the telomeres of chromosomes than near the centromeres.
Finally, some chromosome regions exhibit mach higher crossover rates than most others.
These regions are termed recombination hot spots .
It is not yet known what causes recombination hot spots in humans, al-though specific DNA sequences, possibly including Alu sequences (see Chapter 2), are thought to be especially prone to crossover.

Although there is a correlation between centiMorgans and the actual physical distances between loci, this relationship is complicated by gender differences in recombination, higher recombination frequencies near telomeres, and the existence of recombination hot spots.

LOD Scores: Determining the Significance of Linkage Results

As in any statistical study, we must be careful to ensure that the results obtained in a linkage study are not due simply to chance.
For example, consider a two-allele marker locus that has been typed in a pedigree.
It is possible by chance for all affected offspring to inherit one allele and for all unaffected offspring to inherit the other allele even if the marker is not linked to the disease gene.
This misleading result becomes less likely as we increase the number of subjects in our linkage study (just as the chance of a strong deviation from a 50-50 heads-tails ratio becomes smaller as we toss a coin many times).

Figure 7-5

An NF1 pedigree In which each member has been typed for the lr10 polymorphism (A)

Genotypes for this two-allele marker locus are shown below each individual in the pedigree.
Affected pedigree members are indicated by a shaded symbol.
An autoradiogram for the 1F1O polymorphism in this family (s).

How do we determine whether a linkage result is likely to be due to chance alone?
In linkage analysis a standard method is used.
We begin by comparing the likelihood (a likelihood is similar in concept to a probability) that two loci are linked at a given recombination frequency (denoted 8) versus the likelihood that the two loci are not linked (recombination frequency = 50%, or t = 0,5).
Suppose we wish to test the hypothesis that two loci are linked at a recombination frequency of t = 0.1 versus the hypothesis that they are not linked.
We use our pedigree data to form a likelihood ratio : xxx .

If our pedigree data indicate that t is more likely to be 0,1 than 0,5, then the likelihood ratio (or "odds") will be greater than 1.
If, however, the pedigree data argue against linkage of the two loci, then the denominator will be greater than the numerator, and the ratio will be less than 1,0.
For convenience the common logarithm [2] of the ratio is usually taken; this "logarithm of the odds" is termed a LOD score .

Conventionally, a LOD score of 3,0 is accepted as evidence of linkage; a score of 3,0 indicates that the likelihood in favor of linkage is 1000 times greater than the likelibood against linkage.
Conversely, a LOD score less than -2 (odds of 100 to 1 against linkage ) is considered to be evidence that two loci are not linked.

[2] Recall that the common logarithm of a number is the power to which 10 is raised to obtain the number.
Thus the common logarithm of 100 is 2, the common logarithm of 1000 is 3, and so on.

A simple example will help to illustrate the concepts of likelihood ratios and LOD scores.
Consider the pedigree in Figure 7-6, which illustrates another family in which NF1 is being transmitted.
The family has been typed for the lF10 marker, as in Figure 7-5.
The male in generation 2 had to receive the lF10-1 allele from his mother because she can transmit only this marker allele.
Thus his lF10-2 allele had to come from his father, on the same chromosome as the NF1 disease gene.
This allows us to establish linkage phase in this pedigree:
the affected male in generation 2 must have the haplotypes N2/ n l.
He marries an unaffected woman who is a homozygote for the lF10-2 allele.

Thus the hypothesis of close linkage (6 = 0,0)predicts that each child in generation 3 who receives allele 2 from his or her father must also receive the NF1 disease allele.
Under the hypothesis of linkage, the father can transmit only two possible combinations:
either the chromosome having the disease gene and lF10-2 (N2) or the other chromosome, which has the normal gene and lF10-1 ( n 1).
The probability of each of these events is 1/2 .
Thus if t = 0,0, the probability of observing four children with the genotypes shown in Figure 7-6 is ( 1/2 )q, or 1/16 .
This is the numerator of the likelihood ratio.

Now consider the likelihood of observing these genotypes if lF10 and NF1 were not linked (6 =0,5).
Under this hypothesis, there is independent assortment of alleles at lF10 and NF1.
Thus the father can transmit any of four combinations, Nl,N2, n1, and n 2, with equal probability ( 1/4 ).
The probability of observing four children with the observed genotypes is then 1/4)4 = 1/256 . 
This likelihood is the denominator of the likelihood ratio.
The likelihood ratio is then 1/16:1/256 = 16 .
Thus the data in this pedigree tell us that linkage , at t = 0.0 , is 16 times more likely than nonlinkage .
If we take the common logarithm of 16, we find that the LOD score is 1.2, which is still far short of the value of 3.0 usually accepted as evidence of linkage.
To prove linkage, then, we would need to examine data from additional families.
LOD scores obtained from individual families can be added together to obtain an overall score.

Suppose that a recombination had occurred in the meiosis producing one of the children in generation 3.
This event is impossible under the hypothesis that H = 0.0 , so the numerator of the likelihood ratio becomes 0, and the LOD score is - xxx .

Figure 7-6

An NF1 pedigree in which each member has been typed for the lF10 polymorphism

Again the marker genotypes are shown below each individual in the pedigree.

When doing linkage analysis, a series of t values is usually tested, comparing the likelihood of each value of t with the likelihood that t = 0.5 .
This produces a LOD score for each value of H that is tested.
These LOD scores are then graphed against the t values, as shown in Figure 7-7.
The highest LOD score on the graph is the maximum likelihood estimate of B. 
That is, it is the most likely distance between the two loci being analyzed. 

In practice, the analysis of human linkage data is not as simple as in the previous example.
Linkage phase is often unknown, penetrance of the disease gene may be incomplete, and the mode of inheritance of the disease may be unclear.
Thus linkage data are analyzed using one of several available computer software packages.
These packages also allow one to carry out multipoint mapping , an approach in which the map locations of several markers are estimated simultaneously. 

The statistical odds that two loci are a given number of centiMorgans apart can be calculated by measuring the ratio of two likelihoods: the likelihood of linkage at a given distance divided by the likelihood of no linkage.
The logarithm of this odds ratio is a LOD score.
LOD scores xxx are taken as evidence of linkage, and LOD scores xxx - xxx are taken as evidence that two loci are not linked.

Linkage Analysis and the Human Gene Map

Suppose that we are studying a disease gene in a series of pedigrees, and we wish to map it to a specific chromosome location.
Typically we would type the members of our pedigree for marker loci distributed along each chromosome, testing for linkage between the disease gene and each marker.
Most of these tests would yield negative LOD scores, indicating no linkage between the marker and the disease gene.
Eventually this exercise will reveal linkage between a marker and the disease gene.
Because of the large size of the human genome, one may have to type dozens, or even hundreds, of markers before finding linkage.

Many important diseases have been localized using this approach, including cystic fibrosis, Huntington disease, Marfan syndrome, and NF1.

A little over a decade ago, linkage analyses had little chance of success because there were only a few dozen useful polymorphic markers in the en- tire human genome.
Thus it was unlikely that a disease gene would be located near enough to a marker to yield a significant linkage result.
This situation has changed dramatically over the past few years, as thousands of new polymorphic markers (RFLPs, VNTRs, and microsatellite polymorphisms; see Chapter 3) have been generated (Fig.,7-8). 
It is now commonplace to map a disease gene with only a few months of laboratory and statistical analysis.

Figure 7-7

The LOD score (logarithm of the odds, y-axis) is plotted against the recombination frequency (x-axis) to determine the most likely recombination frequency for a pair of loci

Figure 7-8

The number of known polymorphic marker loci, showing a rapid rate of Increase during the past decade

To be useful for gene mapping, marker loci should have several properties.

First, they should be codominant (i.,e., homozygotes should be distinguishable from heterozygotes).
This makes it easier to determine linkage phase.
RFLPs, VNTRs, and microsatellite polymorphisms fulfill this criterion, whereas some of the older types of markers, such as the ABO and Rh blood groups, do not. 
Second, marker loci should be numerous, so that close linkage to the disease gene is likely.
As Figure 7-8 shows, this requirement has largely been fulfilled.

Figure 7-9

A genetic map of chromosome 9, showing the locations of a large number of polymorphic markers 

Because recombination rates are usually higher in female meiosis, the distances between markers (in cM) are larger for females than for males

Clinical Genetics and Genetic Counseling 

Medical genetics has recently emerged as a true specialty in medicine.
In the 1960s the fields of biochemical genetics, clinical cytogenetics, and dysmorphology (the study of abnormal physical development) developed.
The 1 970s witnessed the establishment of the techniques necessary for the prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders.
By the end of the 1970s, discussions about the formation of an American Board of Medical Genetics had occurred, and in 1 9X 1 the first certification examination was administered.

Ten years later the American Board of Medical Specialties recognized this new field.

Whereas medical genetics is the study of the hereditary nature of human disease, clinical genetics deals with the direct clinical care of persons with genetic diseases.
The diagnostic, counseling, and management issues surrounding genetic disease are the principal foci of clinical genetics.

In this chapter we summarize the principles of clinical genetics and the process of genetic counseling.
In addition, this chapter provides an overview of the field of dysmorphology since the growth of this area has influenced and paralleled the emergence of clinical genetics.

THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL GENETICS

As mentioned in Chapter 1, genetic conditions as a group are common and are a significant cause of human mortality and morbidity.
Typically, genetic disorders are complex, multiorgan, and systemic conditions.
The care of persons with these disorders often involves multiple specialties.
Thus genetic disorders are part of the differential diagnosis of most symptoms and clinical presentations.
For example, when evaluating an infant with a blistering skin disease, the ability to distinguish between one of the many forms of epidermolysis bullosa (an inherited disorder of keratinocytes in which skin blisters develop after mild trauma; SOL 67) and staphylococcal skin disease must be part of the clinician's repertoire.

Because of the complexity and number of human genetic diseases, their clinical diagnosis and treatment can seem overwhelming. 
To help manage this information, we provide an overview of the most important concepts.
These include the importance of accurate diagnosis, the application of the tenets of medical genetics to medical practice, and the role of genetic counseling in the care of persons with genetic disease.

Accurate Diagnosis

The significance of this basic medical principle cannot be overemphasized.
The process of genetic counseling, one of the central services of medical genetics, begins with correct diagnosis.
All discussions of natural history, prognosis, management, risk determination, options for prenatal diagnosis, and referral to support groups depend on an accurate diagnosis.
For example, genetic counseling for a family who has a son with mental retardation usually involves questions of risk for this condition in future offspring.
An accurate answer requires the clinician to identify a condition of known etiology.
If a specific diagnosis (e.,g., fragile X syndrome) is made, then the rest of the genetic counseling process starts: current information can be shared and management initiated (see Clinical Commentary 12-1 for further discussion of this point). 

In clinical genetics, as in all of medicine, accurate diagnosis is the most important first step in patient care.

The process of diagnosing a genetic disorder is a complex sequence of events.
It depends upon diagnostic decision-making, biochemistry, dysmorphology, laboratory diagnosis, and the basic principles of medical genetics.
For diseases in which the diagnostic criteria are well established, the practitioner has guidelines for making a diagnosis.
An example of such criteria would be those recommended by the National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference for the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1, see Chapter 4).

Clinical Commentary 12-1.

Reasons for Making a Diagnosis of a Syndrome. 

The long list of syndromes associated with congenital malformations is overwhelming to the clinician.
More than 400 conditions are listed in Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformations , and more than 1000 are accessible through the POSSUM computerized data base.
This number imparts a sense that the diagnosis of a malformation syndrome lies in the arena of "academic trivia." However, this is not the case. 

Consider, for example, the child who is large for gestational age and has a number of physical abnormalities: omphalocele (intestinal protrusion at the umbilicus), large tongue, facial hemangioma, flank mass, and asymmetric limb length (Fig., 12-1).
His family has questions such as "what does he have?
", "how will he do?
", "will he look different?
", "will he have mental retardation?
", and "what is the chance of his condition occurring again?

By putting these features together and making the pattern recognition diagnosis of the Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome, the clinician is able to answer all of the parents' questions fairly precisely.
Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition with variable expression and incomplete penetrance. 
In addition, the gene is thought to exhibit imprinting. 
When there is no family history, however, the sibling recurrence risk is less than 5%.
When there is a family history, the recurrence risk is much higher, and linkage analysis may provide a more precise risk estimate.
In future pregnancies prenatal diagnosis using ultrasound can be implemented to look for an omphalocele in the second trimester as well as large size for gestational age, excessive amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), and large tongue.
If a fetus is thought to have Wiedemann- Beckwith syndrome, then the delivery plan would change and the baby should be born in a tertiary care center.

Children with the Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome do not usually have mental retardation.
Although the large tongue can cause orthodontic problems, speech difficulties, and occasionally upper airway problems, these conditions usually improve as one gets older.
The facial appearance is not strikingly abnormal in later childhood.

Chromosomes should probably be studied, although most Wiedemann-Beckwith patients do not have the chromosome 11 abnormality which has been reported in a small number of cases.
Otherwise the main emphases of the medical care plan include periodic ultrasound to look for intraabdominal malignancies, especially Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma.
Children with Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome have a 5% to 10% risk of developing these tumors, and both types are treatable if detected early.

In this example it was important to diagnose the Wiedemann-Beckwith syndrome.

The correct label led to precise information for genetic counseling, prediction of natural history (including reassurance), organization of appropriate laboratory studies, a health maintenance plan, and referral to a support group.

Diagnosis was helpful to the parents, the family physician, and the child.

Figure 12-1

A child with Wiedemann-Beekwith syndrome.

Note the prominent eyes and large, protruding tongue

For conditions that are defined by a specific laboratory marker, such as an abnormal karyotype or biochemical assay, the diagnostic procedure is generally straightforward.
For many genetic diseases, however, there are no well- established criteria, and the definition and delineation of the disorder are not clear-cut.

Dysmorphic syndromes require knowledge and skills in the recognition of mild malformations, minor anomalies, and phenotypic variations.
The diagnosis of other genetic diseases may require expertise from a variety of disciplines.
For instance, the diagnosis of any of the forms of retinitis pigmentosa (see Chapter 7) requires input from an ophthalmologist who is familiar with this group of retinal degenerative conditions.
The diagnostic process is further complicated by the variable expression, incomplete penetrance, and heterogeneity of many genetic diseases. 
These concepts were discussed in Chapter 4.

Application of the Principles of Medical Genetics

Developing a genetic approach to human disease in the clinical setting requires the application of all of the basic principles of medical genetics discussed in this book.
For example, making or excluding the diagnosis of NF 1 requires knowledge of the clinical variability and age of onset of certain features of the condition (see Clinical Commentary 12-2 for further discussion). 
The recognition of the various forms of neurofibromatosis (i., e, recognition of heterogeneity) is also important.

Knowledge of the other formal principles of medical genetics is also necessary in the care of persons with genetic conditions. 
The accumulation of family history data and the interpretation of pedigree information are important in answering a family's questions of risk.
An understanding of the different modes of inheritance is important in any explanation of recurrence risk.
Discussion of the concepts of new mutation and pleiotropy are commonplace in reviewing the cause and pathogenesis of a genetic disease with a family.
Even an understanding of meiosis is a requirement for discussions of etiology with the family of a newborn with Down syndrome.

Genetic Counseling

Definition and Principles

Genetic counseling represents one of the central foci of medical genetics.
At first glance, use of the term counseling implies that this service lies in the domain of mental health, social work, or psychotherapy.
In fact, genetic counseling is based on the conventional medical model because it depends significantly on accurate diagnosis and knowledge of medical genetics.

As a tradition, genetic counseling grew out of the field of human genetics rather than from behavioral science, unlike other counseling disciplines.

In 1975 the American Society of Human Genetics adopted a definition of genetic counseling that has stood the test of time: Genetic counseling is a communication process which deals with the human problems associated with the occurrence or risk of occurrence of a genetic disorder in a family.
1 comprehend the medical facts including the diagnosis, probable course of the disorder, and the available management,

2 appreciate the way heredity contributes to the disorder and the risk of recurrence in specified relatives,

3 understand the alternatives for dealing with the risk of recurrence,

4 choose a course of action which seems to them appropriate in their view of their risk, their family goals, and their ethical and religious standards and act in accordance with that decision, and

5 to make the best possible adjustment to the disorder in an affected family member and/or to the risk of recurrence of that disorder.



This definition illustrates the complex tasks that face the practitioner.
The first task involves establishing the diagnosis and discussing the natural history and management of the condition.
In this regard the treatment of a genetic disease does not differ from that of any other type of disease. 

The second task requires an understanding of the basic tenets of medical genetics, especially risk determination.
For chromosomal and multifactorial disorders, empirical risks are used to estimate recurrence.
Segregation patterns are used to predict the recurrence risk of mendelian disorders. 
However, the clinical issues are frequently complicated by incomplete penetrance, variable expression, delayed age of onset, and allelic and locus heterogeneity.
In some cases, incorporation of additional information using the Bayesian probability approach can significantly alter risk estimates (Clinical Commentary 12-3, page 237).

The third and fourth objectives of the genetic counseling process underlie the primary differences between the genetic model and the traditional biomedical approach.
These tasks involve the discussion of reproductive options and the facilitation of decision-making.
Implicit in the fourth part of the definition is the notion of respect for the family's autonomy and their perceptions of risk and of the disorder itself.
This approach has been called nondirectiveness : the counselor leaves all decisions about future reproduction up to the family.
This differs somewhat from the more traditional medical approach in which recommendations for treatment or intervention are made.

Clinical Commentary, 12-2.

Negative Family History

One of the common discussions on ward rounds is the notation that a person's family history is "negative" or "noncontributory." This is often thought to rule out a genetic disorder.
However, the majority of individuals who have a genetic disease will not have a "positive" family history. 
A quick review of the mechanisms of mendelian, chromosomal, and multifactorial disease inheritance shows that a lack of other affected persons in the family is common and does not by any means rule out the presence of a genetic disease.
For example, the sibling recurrence risk is 25% for diseases with autosomal recessive inheritance.
Thus a significant number of families with multiple offspring will only have one affected child and no family history.
Even some well-established autosomal dominant disorders may often present a negative family history because of high proportions of new mutations [examples include Marfan syndrome, neurofibromatosis type I (NF I ), and achondroplasia, in which the proportions of cases caused by new mutations are 30%, 50%, and 80%, respectively].
Chromosomal syndromes usually have a low recurrence risk.
Even when a parent carries a balanced chromosome rearrangement, the recurrence risk among the offspring is usually less than 15%.
The sibling recurrence risks for multifactorial conditions are usually 5% or less.

Case

A family comes in with a 6-year-old boy who has 10 café-au-lait spots exceeding 0,5 cm in diameter and an optic glioma (Fig., 12-2, page 236).
The family has questions about the diagnosis and recurrence risk in future pregnancies. 
On initial telephone contact it is learned that there is no history of a family member with similar features.

There are several possible explanations for this finding. 
Exploring them underscores the implications of a negative family history:

1 New mutation of the NF1 gene . Because of the relatively high proportion of new mutations for this disorder, this is the most likely explanation.

2 Variable expression . It is also possible that one of the parents carries the gene with mild expression.
Occasionally a parent has multiple café-au-lait spots and a few neurofibromas, but a diagnosis of NF1 has never been made.

3 Incomplete penetrance . This is a possibility; however, it is unlikely for NF1, in which penetrance is close to 100%.
If a family has two children with NF1 and neither parent has the gene, germline mosaicism would be the more likely explanation.

4 Incorrect diagnosis . One of the assumptions and basic principles of medical genetics is accurate diagnosis.
This patient meets the NIH established criteria for NF1 (sce Chapter 4).
However, if this individual had only café-au-lait spots, then the diagnosis would have been an issue.
One would need to know the differential diagnosis of multiple café-au- lait spots.

5 False paternity . Although relatively unlikely, this possibility must be kept in mind.


We began with an individual having a classical autosomal dominant disorder with no family history.
This can be explained in a number of ways.
The statement that there is "a negative family history" should not be considered conclusive evidence against the presence of a heritable condition.

This is an important issue because nondirectiveness sometimes conflicts with the broader view of preventive medicine, which might suggest that the principal goal of genetic counseling should be the reduction of the incidence of genetic diseases.
If prevention or reduction of occurrence is the primary goal, then one's approach might be more directive.
However, the main goal of genetic counseling is to help families understand and cope with genetic disease, not to reduce the incidence of genetic disease.

Although most geneticists subscribe to the principles of autonomy and nondirectiveness, it may sometimes be impossible to be entirely nondirective simply because of the limited options that the counselor has in a time- restricted session.
In addition, information may be presented differently in different contexts.
Information about Down syndrome, for example, may be communicated differently depending on whether a diagnosis has been made prenatally or following the birth of an affected newborn (Clinical Commentary 12-4, page 239).

The majority of clinical geneticists subscribe to the principle of nondirectiveness: information about risks, natural history, treatment, and outcome are presented in a balanced and neutral manner, but decisions about reproduction are left to the family.

The facilitation of discussion about reproductive decision-making is central to the task of genetic counseling.
Several factors are involved in a family's decision about future pregnancies when there is an increased risk.
The obvious ones are the magnitude of the risk figure and the burden or impact of the disorder.
However, these are not the only significant issues.
A family's individual perception of the impact of the condition is probably more important in their decision-making than the professional's perception of the burden.
The meaning of children to the individual family, according to their own religious or personal preferences, is weighed heavily in the reproductive decision-making process.
In addition, families frequently play out the scenario of coping with a recurrence of the condition in another child.
Identification of these issues for a family often helps to stimulate their own discussions. 
Some families perceive risk qualitatively rather than quantitatively: they consider themselves to be either "at risk" or not, with the actual risk estimate being a secondary consideration. 
The fact that there is so much variation in the importance people assign to each of these factors (perception of risk, perception of impact, meaning of children, and the possibility of recurrence)underscores the point that the professional should be a facilitator and not the decision-maker.

Figure 12-2

A 6-year-old boy with multiple café-au-lait spots and axillary freckling. 

Clinical Commentary 12-3. 

Recurrence Risks and Bayes Theorem.

The estimation of recurrence risks was discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
A typical example of recurrence risk estimation would be a case in which a man affected with hemophilia A, an X-linked recessive disorder, produces a daughter (individual II-1 in the pedigree at right).
Because the man can transmit only the X chromosome carrying the hemophilia A mutation to his daughter, she must be a carrier.
The carrier's daughter, individual III-6, has a 50% chance of receiving the X chromosome carrying the mutation and being herself a carrier.

Even though the daughter in generation III has five normal brothers, her risk remains 50% because we know that the mother in generation II is a carrier.

Suppose now that the woman in generation III produces three sons (generation IV), none of whom has hemophilia A.
Intuitively, we might begin to suspect that she is not a carrier after all. 
How can we incorporate this new information into our recurrence risk estimate?

A statistical principle that allows us to make use of such information is called Bayes theorem (the application of Bayes theorem is often termed Bayesian analysis or Bayesian inference).
The table below summarizes the basic steps involved in Bayesian analysis.
We begin with the prior probability that the woman in generation III is a carrier.
As its name suggests, the prior probability denotes the probability that she is a carrier before we account for the fact that she has produced three normal sons. 
Because we know her mother is a carrier, this prior probability must be 1/2.
Then the prior probability that she is not a carrier is also 1/2.

Next we take into account her three normal sons by estimating the probability that all three of them would be normal given that she is a carrier.
Because this probability is conditioned on her carrier status, it is termed a conditional probability .
If she is a carrier, the conditional probability that all three of her sons are normal is xxx , or xxx .

We also estimate the probability that all of her sons are normal, given that she is not a carrier.
This conditional probability is, of course, very close to 1. 

Next we want to find the probability that the woman is a carrier and that she is a carrier with three normal sons.
To obtain the probability of the cooccurrence of these two events, we multiply the prior probability times the conditional probability to derive a joint probability (i.,e., the probability of both events occurring together, a concept discussed in Chapter 4).
The joint probability that she is a carrier is then xxx x xxx , xxx .
Similarly, the joint probability that she is not a carrier is xxx .
These joint probabilities indicate the woman is 8 times more likely not to be a carrier than to be a carrier.

The final step is to standardize the joint probabilities so that the two probabilities under consideration (i.,e., being a carrier vs. not being a carrier) add to 1.
To do this we simply divide the joint probability that the woman is a carrier ( xxx ) by the sum of the two joint probabilities ( xxx ). 
This yields a posterior probability of 1/9 that she is a carrier and 8/9 that she is not a carrier. 
Notice that this standardization process allows us to provide a risk estimate (1/9, or 11 %) while preserving the odds of noncarrier versus carrier status indicated by the joint probabilities. 

Having worked through the Bayesian analysis, we see that our intuition was confirmed:
the fact that the woman in question produced three normal sons reduced her risk of being a carrier substantially, from an initial estimate of 50% to a final probability of only 11%.

Prior to the advent of disease diagnosis through linked markers or mutation detection, Bayesian analysis was often the only way to derive a risk estimate in a situation such as this one.
Now, one would attempt to identify the factor VIII mutation that causes hemophilia A in this family directly, or, failing this, linked markers would be used.
This is a mach more direct and accurate approach for determining carrier status.
However, as discussed in Chapter 11, it is not always possible to identify the responsible mutation, particularly when a large number of mutations can cause the disorder (as is the case for hemophilia A).
In addition, linkage analysis is not always informative.
Thus Bayesian analysis is still sometimes a useful tool for refining risk estimates.

The additional information incorporated in Bayesian analysis is not confined tO the assessment of health status in relatives, as shown in this example.
Another type of information is a biochemical assay, such as factor VIII activity level, that could help to indicate carrier status.
Because there is usually overlap between carriers and normal homozygotes for such tests, the assay cannot determine carrier status with certainty but gives us a probability estimate for incorporation into Bayesian analysis.
In diseases with delayed age of onset, such as adult polycystic kidney disease, the probability of being affected at a certain age can be used in a Bayesian analysis. 
Here one considers the fact that the at-risk individual is less and less likely to have the disease gene if he or she remains normal beyond a certain age.

The final task of genetic counseling is to help the family cope with the presence of the disorder and/or its risk of recurrence. 
This task is similar to the physician's support of a family that deals with any chronic disease and/or disability. 
What is unique, perhaps, is the family's perception of the meaning of a genetic disorder.
In many acquired conditions, such as infections or accidents, the ultimate meaning of the condition is externalized.
In genetic disorders, the condition is more intrinsic to the individual and the family; it thus often presents a complex personal dilemma.

Validation of the plight of families is vital and is probably more effective than simplistic attempts to wipe away guilt.
Feelings of guilt and shame are natural to the situation and also need acknowledgment.

The primary care practitioner plays a vital role in the ongoing support of families in which a member has a genetic disease. 
Additional support strategies include referral of the family to a genetics support group, distribution of written information on the disorder, referral to mental health professionals for ongoing counseling, and frequent follow-up visits that include time for discussions of feelings and thoughts.

Genetic counseling includes five themes: medical management, risk determination, risk options, reproductive decision-making, and support services.

Numerous studies in the last two decades have attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of genetic counseling.
The methodology of these studies is complicated, and the evaluation of the results depends on one's interpretation of the goal of genetic counseling.
A few general points, however, can be made:
Families tend to recall recurrence risks relatively well.
A letter sent to them after the visit improves this recall.
Families who perceive their offspring's condition as being serious and one o "burden" recall risk figures better. 
Most studies suggest that genetic counseling is relatively effective in providing information about the medical aspects and genetic risks of the condition.
Issue surrounding decision-making and psychosocial support require additional investigation. 

Delivery of Genetic Counseling: Genetic Counselors and Support Groups

As genetic counseling evolved in the 1970s, it became clear that the delivery of this service is complex and time-consuming. 
Not only did the geneticist need to have skills in most specialties o medicine, but facilitation of decision-making am provision of psychological support were also necessary.
As a need for genetics professionals other than the physician became apparent, a number o genetic counseling training programs were initiated.
Currently, there are more than a dozen programs in North America that provide master's degree training in genetic counseling.
Genetic, counselors have become an integral part of the, delivery of medical genetic services. 
From this growth evolved a professional society, the National Society of Genetic Counselors, and more recently the certifying and accrediting board, the America, Board of Genetic Counseling.

Although the range o skills is wide and job descriptions vary in different medical centers, genetic counselors have established themselves as experts in risk determination reproductive decision-making, and psychosocial support.
