
THE TREATMENT OF GENETIC DISEASE

In the corning decades, the impact of molecular biology and protein engineering on the treatment of genetic disease may be as great as that of DNA polymorphisms and positional cloning on general medical genetics in the preceding decade.
In this chapter, therefore, we not only provide an overview of the standard therapies used in the management of genetic disease but also outline some of the new strategies that may be used in the future.
In particular, we emphasize therapies that reflect the genetic approach to medicine.
As with all therapy, the objective of treating genetic disease is to eliminate or ameliorate the effects of the disorder on not only the patient but also the family.
In addition, the family must be informed about the risk that the disease may occur in other members.
The latter responsibility, genetic counseling, is a major component of the management of hereditary disorders and is dealt with separately in Chapter 18.
The preferred treatment of many single-gene diseases will eventually be gene transfer therapy, if the procedure can be made safe and effective However, even when copies of a normal gene can be transferred into the patient to effect permanent cure, the family will need ongoing patient counseling, carrier testing, and prenatal diagnosis, in many cases over several generations. 
For the present, we are left with replacing the defective protein, improving its function, or minimizing the consequences of its deficiency.
A number of excellent overviews of the treatment of genetic disease have been published, including those by Valle (1987), Beaudet and colleagues (1989), Rosenberg (1990), and Desnick (1991).

THE PRESENT STATE OF TREATMENT OF GENETIC DISEASE

Multifactorial Diseases

For most multifactorial diseases (see Chapter 15), both the genetic and environmental components of the etiology are poorly understood.
However, when an environmental contribution is recognized, an opportunity for effective intervention is available because exposure to the environmental factor can often be modified. 
Thus cigarette smoking is an environmental factor that all patients with emphysema should avoid.
At least one mechanism by which cigarette smoke leads to emphysema has been disclosed by the study of the single-gene disorder xxx deficiency.
As described in the preceding chapter, cigarette smoke oxidizes the critical methionine residue at the active site of xxx , which reduces by 2000-fold its ability to inhibit elastase.
Thus smoking produces a substantial acquired loss of xxx function.

The general impression that genetic diseases are invariably difficult to treat is contradicted by data on disorders of multifactorial inheritance in newborns that may be cured by surgery, a form of phenotypic modification.
These conditions include congenital heart defects, cleft lip and palate, and pyloric stenosis.
Remarkably, these three structural abnormalities affect nearly 1.5 percent of all live-born infants, who make up approximately 30 percent of all newborns with genetic disease.
In about half of these patients, the diseases are curable by a single operation;
a cure is therefore possible in at least 10 to 15 percent of infants with a genetically determined disorder. 
However, the treatment of inherited disease is rarely so beneficial, although it often improves the quality of life. 
For multifactorial disorders that typically present in adolescence or adult life, such as essential hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, and schizophrenia and other major psychoses, the imperfections of treatment reflect ignorance of the etiology. 

Single-Gene Diseases

The treatment of single-gene diseases is sadly deficient at present.
A recent survey of 351 disorders showed that with current therapy, the life span can be restored to normal in only about 15 percent of single-gene conditions, reproductive capability in 11 percent, and social adaptation in 6 percent. 
However, one bright note was identified by the analysis: 
the success of treatment is greatest for disorders in which the basic biochemical defect is known.
Even in this favored group, however, the treatment was completely corrective for phenotypic dysfunction in only 12 percent, partially corrective in 40 percent, and of no effect in the remainder.
Thus research to elucidate the genetic and biochemical basis of hereditary disease does have an impact on the patient, although even in biochemically defined disorders, current therapy fails to restore normal health to the great majority of patients.


The present unsatisfactory state of treatment of genetic disease is due to numerous factors, including the following three:
1 The mutant locus in more than 80 percent of genetic diseases is unknown, and knowledge of the pathophysiology in those diseases in which the affected gene or biochemical abnormality is known is inadequate.
In phenylketonuria (PKU), for example, despite years of study, the mechanisms by which the elevation in phenylalanine impairs brain development and function are still poorly understood.
For diseases such as cystic fibrosis and Duchenne muscular dystrophy, in which the affected protein has only recently been identified, much work is required before the normal function of the polypeptide is determined and the disease process fully elucidated.

2 Some mutations act early in development or cause irreversible pathology before they are diagnosed.
These problems can be anticipated in some cases if there is a family history of a genetic disease or if carrier screening identifies couples at risk.
In the latter case, prenatal treatment is sometimes possible, for both medical and surgical conditions.

3 The initial cases of a disease to be recognized are usually severely affected ones, which are often less amenable to treatment than more mildly affected ones.
In the milder cases, the mutant protein may retain some residual function that can be increased by one of several strategies, as described later.


Figure 1

The effect of treatment of genetic diseases on three disease manifestations.

Although the response to treatment is poor both for diseases of unknown cause and those in which the biochemical defect is known, the results are better in the latter group. 

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN TREATING GENETIC DISEASE

The Need for Long-Term Assessment of Treatment

In genetic disease, perhaps more than in other areas of medicine, treatment initially judged as successful may eventually be shown to be imperfect.
There are at least three facets to this problem.
First, treatment may initially appear to be successful, only to be shown by longer observation to have subtle inadequacies.
Thus although wellmanaged children with PKU have escaped severe retardation and have normal or near-normal IQs (see below), they often manifest subtle learning disorders and behavioral disturbances that impair their academic performance. 
Similarly, in galactosemia patients, learning disabilities like those observed in treated PKU patients have been recognized. 

Second, successful treatment of the pathological changes in one organ may be followed by unexpected problems in tissues not previously observed to be clinically involved, because the patients did not survive long enough.
For example, despite conscientious treatment, most females with galactosemia have ovarian failure that appears to result from continued galactose toxicity.

The detection of the later manifestations may require many years of observation after the initial therapy.
Another disease that illustrates this phenomenon is cystinosis , which is caused by cystine accumulation in the Iysosome due to a defect in cystine efflux.
The cystine storage initially leads to renal failure.
As patients who receive renal transplants grow older, however, morbidity results from hypothyroidism, from islet cell disease that causes diabetes, and from various neurological abnormalities.
A final example is provided by mutations in the retinoblastoma gene .
Patients successfully treated for the eye tumor in the first years of life are at increased risk of developing an independent malignancy, osteosarcoma, after the first decade.
Ironically, therefore, treatment that successfully prolongs life provides a new opportunity for the clinical expression of the basic defect, particularly in conditions in which the mutant gene is normally expressed in many tissues, thus providing more potential targets for the development of pathology.

Third, therapy that is problem free in the short term may produce serious side effects in the long term.
For example, clotting factor infusion in hemophilia sometimes results in the formation of antibodies to the infused protein, and blood transfusion in thalassemia invariably produces iron overload, which can be managed but with difficulty.

Genetic Heterogeneity and Treatment 

The optimal treatment of single-gene defects often requires an unusual degree of diagnostic precision, at the level of the affected molecule.
As stated repeatedly in early chapters, genetic heterogeneity (allelic heterogeneity or locus heterogeneity) is a common characteristic of genetic diseases.
For proper management, it is often critical not simply to treat a biochemical abnormality but to identify precisely the basic biochemical defect, as opposed to a secondary defect such as those outlined in Table 12-9.
For example, abnormalities in phenylalanine hydroxylase and in the enzymes of biopterin metabolism both produce hyperphenylalaninemia, but the treatment of the two types of defects is quite different. 
Even allelic mutations may require different management: 
the clinically distinct, ß-globin disorders, thalassemia, and sickle cell disease, illustrate this concept. 

The study of allelic variants of enzyme defects has shown that alleles that retain small amounts of residual enzyme activity often cause much less severe disease than null alleles.
The contrast between patients with classic PKU (with virtually no residual enzyme activity) and those with benign hyperphenylalaninemia (with about 5 percent activity) illustrates this principle.
The corollary of this observation is that effective treatment of classic PKU by gene or enzyme transfer would require the delivery of only small amounts of phenylalanine hydroxylase.

Allelic heterogeneity has additional implications for therapy. 
Some alleles produce a protein that is decreased in abundance but has residual function.
Strategies designed to increase the expression or stability of the partially functional protein may be effective in correcting the biochemical defect.
In contrast, nothing is to be gained by increasing the abundance of a mutant protein with no residual function.
In fact, increased expression of a functionless mutant protein may be detrimental because it may exert a dominant negative effect if it interacts with the product of the normal allele, or with other proteins, to impair their function.
This consideration is also relevant to efforts to transfer a normal gene into a patient with a genetic disease.
For example, in osteogenesis imperfecta, patients with null alleles may be easier to treat by gene transfer than those with qualitatively abnormal collagen chains that reduce the effective contribution of the transferred gene.

TREATMENT STRATEGIES

Genetic disease can be treated at many levels, at various steps away from the mutant gene (Fig. 13-2).
In the remainder of this chapter, we describe the rationale used or proposed for treatment at each of these levels.
In general, diseases described earlier in the book are used as examples, although new disorders are presented when necessary to illustrate a specific approach.
None of the current treatments are necessarily mutually exclusive, although successful gene transfer therapy would render other therapies superfluous.
Treatment "at the level of the clinical phenotype" (Fig. 13 - 2) is a category meant to include all the types of medical or surgical intervention that are not unique to the management of genetic disease.
Often this is the only therapy available and, in some cases, may be all that is necessary, as is the case, for example, with some surgically correctable malformations.
Finally, the importance of educating the patient-not only to achieve understanding of the disease, its genetic implications, and the treatment but also to ensure compliance with therapy that may be inconvenient and lifelong-cannot be overemphasized.

Treatment of Metabolic Abnormalities 

The most successful disease-specific approach to the treatment of genetic disease has been at the level of the metabolic abnormality. 
In fact, this concept is familiar to those who are aware of the need for dietary compensation for the inability of humans and other higher primates to synthesize ascorbic acid (vitamin C).
The principal strategies used to manipulate metabolism in the treatment of inborn errors are listed in Table 1.
The necessity for patients with pharmacogenetic diseases, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, to avoid certain drugs and chemicals is described in Chapter 12.

Dietary Restriction

Dietary restriction is one of the oldest and most effective methods of managing genetic disease.
Its advantage is that it can be highly effective;
its drawback is that it usually requires lifelong compliance with a restricted and often artificial diet.
This dietary constraint is onerous for the family as well as the patient, especially in adolescence. 
Many of the diseases treatable in this manner involve amino acid catabolic pathways, and therefore severe restriction of normal dietary protein is usually necessary.
Essential nutrients such as amino acids, however, cannot be withheld entirely; 
their intake must be sufficient for anabolic needs.
Patients with mild enzymatic defects (i.e., "leaky" mutant alleles) can tolerate more of the offending compound;
consequently, the diet is less restrictive, and compliance may be better.
In other cases, the dietary precursor to the offending substrate is not an essential nutrient (e.g., galactose), and it can be eliminated from the diet altogether.
Diseases involving more than two dozen loci are presently managed in this way.

A diet restricted in phenylalanine largely circumvents the neurological damage in classic PKU.
Phenylketonuric children are normal at birth because the maternal enzyme protects them during prenatal life.
The results of treatment are best when the diagnosis is made soon after birth and treatment is begun promptly.
If the child is fed a normal diet in the first months of life, irreversible mental retardation occurs; 
the degree of intellectual deficit is directly related to the delay in the institution of the low-phenylalanine diet. 
The normal mental status of patients with benign hyperphenylalaninemia demonstrates that effective treatment of classic PKU can be achieved if the phenylalanine levels can be kept below about 0.7 mM.
Without this guidance from nature, many clinical trials would have been required to establish a "safe" plasma phenylalanine level in the classic disease.
It is now recommended that patients with PKU remain on a low phenylalanine diet for life because neurological and behavioral abnormalities develop in many (though not all) patients if the diet is stopped.
However, even in patients who have been treated throughout life, it is now clear that even when the IQ is normal or near normal, there are neuropsychological deficits (e.g., in conceptual, visuospatial, and language skills), although treatment produces results vastly superior to the outcome without treatment.

Figure 2

The various levels of treatment that are relevant to genetic disease, with the corresponding strategies used at each level

Table

Level of intervention.


Mutant gene.


Mutant mRNA.
Mutant protein.
Metabolic or other biochemical dysfunction .
Clinical phenotype.


The family .


Treatment strategy.


Modification of the somatic genotype (transplantation; gene transfer therapy in near future).
Pharmacologic modulation of gene expression.
Protein replacement.
Enhancement of residual protein function.
Disease-specific compensation (dietary or pharmacologic) in selected patients .
Medical or surgical intervention; patient education .
Genetic counseling; carrier screening; presymptomatic diagnosis.


Table 1

Treatment of Genetic Disease by Metabolic Manipulation

Type of Metabolic Intervention.
Avoidance .
Dietary restriction.
Replacement.
Diversion.
Inhibition.
Depletion.


Substance or Technique.
Antimalarial drugs.
Isoniazid.
Phenylalanine.
Galactose.
Thyroxine.
Biotin.
Sodium benzoate.
Oral resins.
Lovastatin.
Plasma exchange therapy.


Example.
G6PD deficiency .
Slow acetylators.
PKU.
Galactosemia .
Congenital hypothyroidism.
Biotinidase deficiency.
Urea cycle disorders.
Familial hypercholesterolemia.
Familial hypercholesterolemia .
Familial hypercholesterolemia.


Replacement

The provision of essential metabolites, cofactors, or hormones whose deficiency is due to a genetic disease is simple in concept and often in application.
Some of the most successfully treated singlegene defects belong to this category.
An important example is congenital hypothyroidism , which results from a variety of defects (10 to 15 percent of which are genetic) in the formation of the thyroid gland or of its major product, thyroxine.
Because congenital hypothyroidism is common (about 1/4000 neonates) and treatment can prevent the associated mental retardation, neonatal screening is conducted in many countries, so that thyroxine administration may be initiated as soon as possible after birth to prevent the severe intellectual defects that are otherwise inevitable.
In biotinidase deficiency , the enzymopathy prevents the recovery of biotin from biotinylated proteins and thus prevents recycling of this enzyme cofactor.
The administration of large amounts of biotin is completely corrective if given before serious neurological sequelae develop.

GENETICS OF CANCER

Cancer is one of the most common and severe problems of clinical medicine.
Statistics show that cancer in some form strikes more than one third of the population, accounts for more than 20 percent of all deaths, and, in developed countries, is responsible for more than 10 percent of the total cost of medical care.

Cancer is not a single disease but rather a name applied to a great variety of malignant tumors that are formed by the same basic process of uncontrolled growth.
Cell proliferation results in a mass (neoplasm or tumor) that invades neighboring tissues (hence the name cancer , meaning crab) and may also metastasize to more distant sites.
The growth is autonomous, increasingly malignant, and, if untreated, invariably fatal.
Early diagnosis and early treatment are vital, and identification of persons at increased risk of cancer before its development is an important objective of cancer research. 

A tumor is composed of a parenchyma of proliferating cells, with a stroma of connective tissue and blood vessels.
There are three main forms:
sarcomas , in which the tumor has arisen in mesenchymal tissue;
carcinomas , which originate in epithelial tissue;
and hematopoietic and lymphoid malignancies such as leukemias and lymphomas.
Within the major groups, tumors are classified by site, tissue type, and degree of malignancy.
Most cancers are disorders of later life, but some are characteristic of childhood or may exhibit a greater degree of malignancy if they occur in younger persons. 

THE GENETIC NATURE OF CANCER

The concept of cancer as a genetic disease is relatively new.
Perhaps 5 percent of all cancers appear to follow a familial pattern; in the great majority, however, inheritance seems to play little or no part.
Nevertheless, many cancers, like other diseases that show features of multifactorial inheritance, have a significant genetic component in that certain people are more susceptible to developing a particular malignancy as a result of genetic defects that predispose to cancer.
Furthermore, it has become apparent that essentially all cancer-even in the absence of any apparent inherited component-is the result of mutations in somatic cells and that its progression also involves the expression of a series of genes.

In the past, viruses and exposure to environmental agents such as ionizing radiation were blamed for most cancers.
It is now recognized that the underlying cause is gene mutation and that when carcinogenic agents are involved, they operate by causing mutation.
The mutations that lead to cancer affect genes responsible for cell proliferation, cell development, and other fundamental cellular activities.
When normal regulation is altered, uncontrolled growth is initiated and a malignant tumor develops.

The understanding of the genetic basis of cancer that has begun to emerge after many decades of investigation has come about largely through the application of molecular genetics to the analysis of various forms of malignant disease.

As so often happens in medical genetics, the abnormal has provided insight into the normal:
learning what goes wrong in cancer has also helped to clarify the genetic control of many aspects of normal cell growth.

The field of cancer genetics is one of the fastest moving in biology and medicine today, and our understanding of cancer mechanisms is increasing rapidly.
Although much remains to be learned, the outlines of a unifying hypothesis are beginning to emerge.
In this chapter we consider the current state of knowledge of the genetic basis of cancer, including the role of specific genes in causing both inherited and sporadic cancers. 

The Clonal Nature of Cancer

There is strong evidence that a tumor is a clone of cells derived from a single ancestral cell in which the initiating event (a somatic mutation) has taken place.
The clonal nature of tumors has been recognized for many years.
The original evidence came from the study of tumors in women heterozygous for the X-linked enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). 
As previously discussed, because of X inactivation, only one of a pair of X-linked alleles in a female heterozygote is expressed in a somatic cell.
Cell lines derived from tumors in these women expressed one or the other G6PD allele but not both, indicating that each tumor had grown from a single cell. 
The characteristic chromosomal rearrangements in many types of cancer, such as the translocations seen in Burkitt lymphoma and in chronic myelogenous leukemia (to be described later), also indicate that these malignancies are of single-cell origin. 

TWO KINDS OF CANCER GENES

Genes that cause cancer are of two distinct types: oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes .
The two types have opposite effects in carcinogenesis. 
Oncogenes facilitate malignant transformation, whereas tumor-suppressor genes, as the name implies, block tumor development by regulating genes involved in cell growth.

Figure 1

General scheme for mechanisms of oncogenesis by proto-oncogene activation and mutation or loss of tumor suppressor genes.

Cell growth and proliferation is stimulated by the products of proto-oncogenes and is under the negative control of tumor-suppressor genes that prevent overgrowth.
Action of oncogenes is dominant and requires only a single mutation, leading to uncontrolled cell growth.
Action of tumor-suppressor genes is recessive;
when bath alleles are mutated or lost, cell growth is unregulated and leads to tumor formation.
See text for discussion.

Oncogenes

Oncogenes are genes that affect normal cell growth and development.
If an oncogene is altered or overexpressed, either as a result of a mutation in the gene itself or by altered external control, the cell in which the change occurred can undergo uncontrolled growth, eventually becoming malignant.
Most oncogenes are mutated ("activated") forms of normal genes, called proto-oncogenes , that are involved in the control of cell proliferation and differentiation.

Oncogenes can be identified experimentally in DNA transfer studies by their ability to transform a nontumorigenic mouse cell line in culture to generate foci of cells with tumorigenic properties.
To date, more than 50 human oncogenes (and thus their normal proto-oncogenes) have been identified, largely on the basis of DNA transfection studies with genomic DNA from human tumors.
Examples of some of these oncogenes are given in Table 1.

It is noteworthy that many (but not all) of the oncogenes identified in human tumors have turned out to be related to viral oncogenes previously isolated from RNA tumor viruses.
The demonstration that genetic information from a virus could change a normal cell into a malignant one established that genes could act as central controllers of malignant conversion.
RNA viruses known as retroviruses have the unique property of transcribing RNA into DNA, using the enzyme reverse transcriptase.
The viral DNA can then be integrated into the chromosomal DNA of the host and expressed.
When the so-called src oncogene (transforming sequences from the Rous sarcoma virus) was characterized, it was found to be not a true viral gene but' a host gene that had been picked up by an ancestor of the virus through a process termed transduction .
The equivalent host gene was the first proto-oncogene to be recognized;
now, as mentioned before, it is recognized that many proto-oncogenes are related to specific RNA tumor viruses (Table 16-1). (Unlike the oncogenes of retroviruses, the oncogenes of DNA tumor viruses, such as Simian virus 40 [SV40] and polyoma virus, are not transduced proto-oncogenes but are viral genes.) Proto-oncogenes have remained highly conserved in evolution; for example, the proto-oncogene H- ras (so named because it was originally identified in the Harvey rat sarcoma virus) and its corresponding protein have been found in organisms as far apart in the evolutionary scale as humans and yeast, suggesting that these proteins have essential biological roles.
The various roles of several classes of proto-oncogene in growth regulation are illustrated in Figure 2.

Table 1

Selected Examples of Oncogenes 

Oncogene.
Source.
Map Location of Proto-Oncogene.
Biochemical Property.


Signal Transduction Proteins.


Abelson murine leakemia virus.


Rous sarcoma virus (chicken) .


Human colon carcinoma.


Harvey rat sarcoma virus.


Various human tumors (neuroblastomas).


Nucleur DNA-Binding Proteins.


xxx Chicken sarcoma.


xxx Human neuroblastoma.


Secreted Growth Factors.


sis Simian sarcoma virus.


Growth Factor Cell Surface Receptors.


xxx Avian erythroblastosis.


Binds DNA .


Unknown.


ß-chain of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF).


Steroid receptor.


Figure 2

Signal transduction and growth regulation by products of proto-oncogenes, classified by their location and function in the cell.

Deregulation of a proto-oncogene can lead to malignant transformation.
1 Secreted growth factors, such as EGF (embryonic growth factor) and PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor)
2 Specific receptors for the secreted growth factors 
3 Cytoplasmic signal transduction proteins such as ras , src , and abl , which are protein kinases and GTP-binding proteins 
4 Nuclear proteins such as myc interact with genes by DNA binding


Proto-Oncogene Activation

An important early finding related to proto-oncogenes came from the molecular analysis of a ras oncogene derived from a bladder carcinoma cell line.
The oncogene and its counterpart proto-oncogene differed in only a single base pair.
The alteration, a point mutation in a somatic cell of the tumor, led to synthesis of an abnormal gene product, which was able to stimulate the growth of the cell line, changing it into a tumor.
Oncogenes have a dominant effect at the cellular level;
that is, when activated, a single mutant allele is sufficient to change the phenotype of a cell from normal to malignant.
Ras point mutations are observed in many tumors, and the ras genes have been shown experimentally to be the target of known carcinogens, a finding that supports a role for mutated ras genes in the development of many cancers. 

Structural mutation is only one of several mechanisms that can induce activation of proto-oncogenes.
Chromosomal translocations are a common mechanism for proto-oncogene activation in a variety of cancers.
In chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), which is discussed in more detail later, increased expression and malignant transformation are related to the translocation of the abl proto-oncogene from its normal position on chromosome 9 to the breakpoint in chromosome 22 in a hematopoietic stem cell.
The 9;22 translocation directly contributes to the development of the malignant phenotype and is also a strong diagnostic indicator of CML, as other characteristic translocations are in other specific types of cancer.

Cytogenetic changes are hallmarks of cancer and are much more common in later and more malignant or invasive stages than in earlier stages of tumor development.
So far, most of the cytogenetic studies of tumor progression have been concerned with leukemias.
In CML, for example, at the blast crisis stage, there may be several additional cytogenetic abnormalities, including numerical or structural changes, such as a second copy of the 9;22 translocation chromosome or an isochromosome for 17q.
In advanced stages of other forms of leukemia, translocations are common.
A focus of cancer research is the cytogenetic and molecular definition of these abnormalities, many of which are already known to be related to proto-oncogenes and presumably allow enhanced proto-oncogene expression.

Another important mechanism for overexpression is gene amplification , a process that is rare or nonexistent in normal cells but sometimes common in cancer cells.
Amplified segments of DNA are often detected as two types of cytogenetic change, double minutes (very small accessory chromosomes) and homogeneously staining regions (HSRs), that do not band normally and contain multiple, amplified copies of a particular DNA segment.
How and why double minutes and HSRs occur is poorly understood, but amplified regions are known to include extra copies of proto-oncogenes with effects on cell growth.
For example, the N- myc proto-oncogene is amplified up to 200 times in 40 percent of neuroblastomas.
The phenomenon is thought to be related to tumor progression.

Table 2

Mechanisms of Activation of Proto-Ocogenes 

Mechanism.
Type of Gene Activated.
Result.


Regulatory mutation.
Growth factor genes.
Increased expression or secretion .


Structural mutation.
Growth factor receptors, signal transducing proteins.
Allows autonomy of expression.


Translocation, retroviral insertion, gene amplification.
Nuclear oncogenes.
Overexpression.


Table 3

Characteristic Chromosome Translocations in Selected Human Malignancies 

Neoplasm.
Chromosome Translocation.
xxx of cases.
Proto-Oncogene Affected.


Burkitt lymphoma.


Chronic myelogenous leukemia .


Acute lymphocyte leukemia.


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Acute promyelocytic leukemia.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia .


Follicular lymphoma.


Requirement for More than One Activated Gene.

An important aspect of the initiation and promotion of carcinogenesis by activated proto-oncogenes is that mutation of a single gene alone seems unable to achieve transformation; rather, separate genes with complementary effects seem to be required.
Although the details of the experiments demonstrating that normal cells require cooperation between different activated oncogenes in order to undergo transformation are not described here, the conclusion is an important one:
malignant transformation is a multi-event process, not to be achieved by a single step. 

Tumor-Suppressor Genes

Whereas the products of proto-oncogenes promote growth, the products of tumor-suppressor genes normally block abnormal growth and malignant transformation, and contribute to malignancy only when the function of both alleles is lost.
In other words, in contrast to mutations in proto-oncogenes, which are dominant in their action, mutations in tumor - suppressor genes are recessive.

The Two-Hit Origin of Cancer

The existence of recessive mutations leading to cancer was originally suggested in the 1960s by DeMars.
He made the prescient suggestion that some forms of cancer might be initiated when a cell in a person heterozygous for a recessive germline mutation undergoes a second, somatic mutation, thus rendering the cell homozygous, giving rise to a tumor.
This "two-hit" hypothesis was expanded by Knudson (1971), who proposed that forms of cancer such as retinoblastoma , which occur in both hereditary and sporadic forms, could be explained on the basis that in the hereditary form the first mutation is carried in the germline, whereas in the sporadic form both mutations are somatic, occurring in the same somatic cell.
The normal genes are now known as tumorsuppressor genes, which play regulatory roles in cell proliferation, differentiation, and other basic cellular functions.
Inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes by mutation or some other mechanism leads to loss of regulation and therefore is oncogenic.

Tumor-Suppressor Genes in Many Forms of Cancer

As described in detail later, tumor-suppressor genes have been implicated in several Mendelian forms of cancer, including retinoblastoma; Wilms tumor; familial polyposis coli; neurofibromatosis, type 1; and the rare form of familial cancer known as Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Although in each of these disorders autosomal dominant inheritance is either the rule or at least seen in a proportion of cases, loss or alteration of both copies of the responsible tumor-suppressor gene is required for tumor development.
The explanation of this seeming paradox is that a single functional copy of a tumor-suppressor gene is enough to provide a normal cellular phenotype;
however, a cell in which one copy is already altered or lost, by either germline or somatic mutation, will lose its ability to suppress tumor development if by chance it acquires a somatic mutation at the remaining allele.
Because tumors are clonal by nature, this event can cause a tumor even if it happens in only one of the numerous cells of a tissue.

The significance of tumor-suppressor genes is not limited to autosomal dominant forms of cancer.
As described later, tumor-suppressor genes a re also involved in the progression of several common, nonheritable forms of cancer, such as colorectal cancer.

Tumor Progression by Clonal Evolution 

The scheme just outlined, whereby the development of malignancy requires only the activation of a proto-oncogene or loss of function of both alleles of a tumor-suppressor gene, is grossly oversimplified. 
Instead, tumor formation is a multistep process involving a succession of genetic changes in the evolving tumor cell population. 

One of the surprising findings about tumor progression is that loss or inactivation of the same gene may contribute to the development of several different common cancers.
For example, the p53 gene on the short arm of chromosome 17 is missing or abnormal in cells of sporadic lung and breast cancers. 
The retinoblastoma gene is missing or defective in nearly all cases of small-cell carcinoma of the lung and in many other cases of lung cancer, but not in cancers such as colon cancer .
Although the full picture of secondary genetic changes and their role in tumor progression is not yet clear, it is already obvious that several mutations at different loci are required if a tumor is to reach its full malignant potential. 

The products of several tumor-suppressor genes have been isolated.
Because tumor-suppressor genes and their products are by nature protective against cancer, it is hoped that their understanding will eventually lead to improved methods of anticancer therapy.

Table 4

Products of Selected Tumor-Suppressor Genes

Tumor-Suppresor Gene.


Gene Product and Possible Functions.


Disorders in Which Gene Affected.


Familial.
Sporadic .


Retinoblastoma.
Small-cell lung carcinomas; lung cancers.


Wilms tumor .
Lung cancer.


Li-Fraumeni syndrome .
Lung cancer; breast cancer.


Neurofibromatosis, type 1.
Unknown.


Unknown.
Colorectal cancer.

