
Immunogenetics

Each day our bodies are confronted with a formidable series of invaders: viruses, bacteria, and many other disease organisms whose goal is to overcome our natural defenses.
These defenses, known collectively as the immune system, consist of a complex collection of trillions of cells.
The immune system must be able to cope with a multitude of invading microorganisms, and it must be able to distinguish "self" from "non-self" with a high degree of accuracy.

As one might expect, the genetic basis of the immune system is complex.
The study of the genetics of the immune system, known as immunogenetics , has benefitted enormously from new developments in gene mapping and cloning.
Most of the techniques discussed in earlier chapters (e.g., linkage analysis, chromosome walking, DNA sequencing) have been used to study the genes responsible for the immune response.
Many new genes have been uncovered, and their functions and interactions have been studied intensely.

This chapter provides a brief review of basic immunology, and it discusses the genes underlying our capacity to defend against a highly diverse array of disease pathogens.
Aspects of autoimmune disease are examined, and some of the major immunodeficiency disorders are discussed.

THE IMMUNE RESPONSE: BASIC CONCEPTS 

Innate Immune System

When a foreign microorganism is encountered, the body's first line of defense includes phagocytes (a type of cell that engulfs and destroys the microorganism) and the complement system .
The complement proteins can destroy microbes directly by perforating their cell membranes, and they can also attract phagocytes and other immune system agents to microbes by coating the microbial surface (it is because of this assisting role that the term "complement" originated).
These components of the immune system can distinguish foreign bodies in a variety of ways.
For example, bacteria are often identified because they produce distinctive peptides beginning with formyl methionine.
Viruses are often recognized because they produce double-stranded RNA, which is relatively rare in mammals.
These components of the early phase of the immune response, termed the innate immune system , recognize only general features of foreign microbes.

The innate immune system, which includes some phagocytes and the complement system, is an early part of the immune response and recognizes general features of invading microorganisms. 

Adaptive Immune System

Although the innate immune system may help hold an infection in check in its early phases, it is often incapable of overcoming the infection.
This is the task of a more specialized component of the immune system, the adaptive immune system .
As its name suggests, this part of the immune system is capable of "adapting" to features of the invading microorganism to mount a more specific and more effective immune response. 

Key components of the adaptive immune response include T lymphocytes (or T cells ) and B lymphocytes (or B cells ).
These cells are created in the body's primary lymphoid organs (bone marrow for B cells and the thymus for T cells).
In the thymus, T cells that can tolerate the body's own peptides are selected, and those that would attack the body's peptides are eliminated.
The B and T cells then progress to secondary lymphoid tissues, such as the lymph nodes, spleen, and tonsils, where they encounter foreign microorganisms.
Mature B lymphocytes produce circulating antibodies , which combat infections.
Because it involves agents that circulate in the bloodstream, this portion of the immune system is sometimes called the humoral immune system .
T lymphocytes help B lymphocytes respond to infections more effectively, and they can directly kill infected cells. 
This part of the immune system is sometimes called the cellular immune system .
It is estimated that the body contains several trillion B and T cells.

B lymphocytes are a component of the adaptive immune system; they produce circulating antibodies in response to infection.
T lymphocytes, another component of the adaptive immune system, interact directly with infected cells to kill these cells, and they aid in the B cell response.

B Cell Response:

Humoral Immune System

A major element of the adaptive immune response begins when specialized types of phagocytes engulf invading microbes and then present peptides derived from these microbes on their cell surfaces.
These cells, which include macrophages and dendritic cells , are termed antigen presenting cells (APCs) .
B cells are also capable of presenting foreign peptides on their cell surfaces.
The foreign peptide is transported to the surface of the APC by a class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule, which carries the foreign peptide in a specialized groove (Fig. 8-1).
This complex, which projects into the extracellular environment, is recognized by another cell, the helper T lymphocyte .
This cell has a receptor on its surface capable of binding (i.,e., forming noncovalent bonds) to the MHC-peptide complex.
As shown in Figure 8-2 (page 158), other cell-surface proteins, such as the various cell adhesion molecules and costimulatory molecules , also participate in the binding process.
Binding the MHC-peptide complex stimulates the helper T lymphocyte to secrete cytokines , which are substances that cause other cells to proliferate.
In particular, these cytokines help stimulate the subset of B lymphocytes whose cell surface receptors, termed immunoglobulins , can bind to the invading microorganism's peptides.
The immunoglobulints capacity to bind a specific foreign peptide (i.,e., its affinity for the peptide) is determined by its shape and other characteristics.

In the humoral immune response, foreign particles are displayed in conjunction with class 11 MHC molecules by APCs. 
These are recognized by helper T cells, which then stimulate proliferation of B cells whose immunoglobulins can bind to the foreign pathogen.

It is estimated that, upon initial exposure to a foreign microbe, only about 1 in every million B lymphocytes happens to produce immunoglobulins capable of binding to the microbe. 
This number is too small to fight an infection effectively. 
Furthermore, the immunoglobulins' binding affinity is likely to be relatively poor.
However, once this relatively small population of B lymphocytes is stimulated, they begin an adaptive process in which minor DNA sequence variations are introduced with each mitotic division (somatic hypermutation, see below). 
These DNA sequence variations in turn produce variations in the binding characteristics of immunoglobulins (e.g., the shape of the protein).

Some of these variant immunoglobulins will possess a higher level of binding affinity for the microorganism.
The B cells producing these immunoglobulins are favorably selected and proliferate rapidly.
These B cells then become plasma cells , which secrete immunoglobulins into the bloodstream.

The secreted immunoglobulins, which are structurally identical to the immunoglobulins that act as receptors on the B cell's surface, are antibodies.

It can now be seen how the adaptive immune system gets its name:
it involves the initial selection of B cells whose receptors can bind with the pathogen and subsequent finetuning of these B cells to achieve higher binding affinity.

During the B-cell response to a foreign peptide, the binding affinity of immunoglobulins for the invading pathogen increases.
When mature, the B cell becomes an antibody-secreting plasma cell.

After initial stimulation by the disease pathogen, the process of B-cell differentiation and maturation into antibody-producing plasma cells requires about 5 to 7 days for completion.
Each plasma cell is capable of secreting approximately 10 million antibody molecules per hour.
Antibodies bind to the pathogen's surface antigens (antigen = " anti body gene rating") and may destroy the microorganism directly.
More often, the antibody "tags" the pathogen for destruction by other components of the immune system, such as complement proteins and phagocytes.

Another important activity of the humoral immune response is the creation of memory cells , a subset of high affinity-binding B cells that persist in the body after the infection has subsided.
These cells, which have already been highly selected for response to the pathogen, provide a more rapid response should the pathogen be encountered again later in the individual's life.
Vaccinations are effective because they induce the formation of memory cells that can respond to a specific pathogen.

Figure 8-1

The humoral Immune response 

Class II MHC molecules in antigen-presenting cells carry foreign peptides to the surface of the cell, where the foreign peptide is recognized by a helper T cell.

The T cell secretes cytokines that stimulate B cells whose Immunoglobulins will bind to the foreign peptide.
These B cells become plasma cells, which secrete antibodies into the circulation to bind with the microbe, helping to combat the Infection. 

Figure 8-2

A detailed view of the binding between a helper T cell and a s cell

In addition to the binding of the T-cell receptor to the MHC-peptide complex, a number of other molecules interact with one another, such as the costimulatory B7-CD28 complex. 

Cellular Immune System

Some microorganisms, such as viruses, are adept at quickly inserting themselves into the body's cells.
Here they are inaccessible to antibodies, which are water-soluble proteins that cannot pass through the cell's lipid membrane.
To combat such infections, a second component of the adaptive immune system, the cellular immune system, has evolved.
A key member of the cellular immune system is the class I MHC molecule, which is found on the surfaces of nearly all of the body's cells. 
In a normal cell the class I MHC molecule binds with small peptides (8 to 10 amino acids in length) derived from the interior of the cell.
It migrates to the cell's surface, carrying the peptide with it and displaying it outside the cell.
Because this is one of the body's own peptides, no immune response is elicited. 
In an infected cell, however, the class I MHC molecule binds to small peptides that are derived from the infecting organism. 
Cell-surface presentation of the foreign peptide by the class I MHC molecule alerts the immune system, T cells in particular.
Recall that T lymphocytes learn to tolerate "self" peptides while developing in the thymus, but they are highly intolerant of foreign peptides.
The MHC-peptide complex binds to a receptor on the appropriate T cell's surface, which prompts the T cell to emit a chemical that destroys the infected cell (Fig. 8-3).
Because of their ability to destroy cells in this way, these T lymphocytes are termed cytotoxic T lymphocytes (or killer T lymphocytes ).
They are also known as CD8 T cells because of the presence of CD8 molecules on their surfaces (helper T cells have a CD4 molecule on their cell surfaces and are thus a type of CD4 T lymphocyte).

Each cytotoxic T lymphocyte can destroy one infected cell every l to 5 minutes.

The cellular immune system is capable of destroying the body's cells once they are infected.
Peptides from the pathogen are displayed on cell surfaces by class I MHC molecules. 
These are recognized by cytotoxic (killer) T lymphocytes, which destroy the infected cell.

Figure 8-3

In a cell infected by a virus, the viral peptides (1, 2) are carried to the cell surface by class I MHC molecules (3)

The T-cell receptor of a CD8 cytotoxic T cell binds to the peptide-MHC complex (4).
Recognizing the peptide as foreign, the cytotoxic T cell secretes chemicals that kill the infected cell (5).

As with B lymphocytes, only a small proportion of the body's T cells will have binding affinity for the infecting pathogen. 
By secreting cytokines, helper T cells stimulate the proliferation of the cytotoxic T lymphocytes that can bind to the infected cells.
In addition, circulating dendritic cells present the foreign peptides on their cell surfaces and migrate to secondary lymphoid tissues, where most of the T cells reside, helping to alert the appropriate T cells to the infection. 

The humoral immune system is specialized to combat extracellular infections, such as circulating bacteria.
The cellular immune system combats intracellular infections, such as viruses and cellular parasites.
However, this division of labor is not strict, and there is a great deal of interaction between the two components of the adaptive immune system.

IMMUNE RESPONSE PROTEINS:

GENETIC BASIS OF STRUCTURE AND DIVERSITY

Immunoglobulin Genes and Structure 

As illustrated in Figure 8-4, each antibody (or immunoglobulin) molecule is composed of four chains:
an identical pair of longer heavy chains and an identical pair of shorter light chains.
The chains are linked together by disulfide bonds. 
There are five different types of heavy chains (termed y, m, u, a , and e ) and two types of light chains ( K and A ).
The five types of heavy chains determine the major class (or isotype ) to which an immunoglobulin (Ig) molecule belongs: y, m, t, d , and E correspond to the immunoglobulin isotypes IgG, IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE, respectively.
Immature B lymphocytes produce only IgM, but as they mature, a rearrangement of heavy chain genes called class switching occurs.
This produces the four other major classes of immunoglobulins, each of which differs in amino acid composition, charge, size, and carbohydrate content.
Each class tends to be localized in certain parts of the body, and each tends to respond to a different type of infection.
The two types of light chains can be found in association with any of the five types of heavy chains.

Figure 8-4

An antibody molecule consists of two identical light chains and two identical heavy chains 

The light chain includes variable, joining, and constant regions, and the heavy chain Includes these regions as well as a diversity region located between its variable and joining regions.
The upper portion of the figure depicts a molecular model of antibody structure.

The heavy and light chains both contain a constant and a variable region, which are located at the C-terminal and N- terminal ends of the chains, respectively.
The arrangement of genes encoding the constant region determines the major class of the Ig molecule (e.,g., IgA, IgE).

The variable region is responsible for antigen recognition and binding and thus varies within immunoglobulin classes.
Three distinct gene segments encode the light chains: C for the constant region, V for the variable region, and J for the region joining the constant and variable regions.
Four gene segments encode the heavy chains, with C, V, and J coding again for the constant, variable, and joining regions, respectively, and a "diversity" (D) region located between the joining and variable regions.
The genes encoding the K light chain are located on chromosome 2, and those encoding the L light chain are on chromosome 22.
The genes that encode the heavy chains are on chromosome 14.

Immunaglobulin molecules consist of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains.
The heavy chain constant region determines the major class to which an immunoglobulin belongs.
The variable regions of the light and heavy chains recognize and bind antigens.

Basis of Immunoglobulin Diversity

Our bodies face an enormous variety of infectious organisms. 
Because the immune system cannot "know" in advance what types of microbes it will encounter, the system must contain a huge reservoir of structurally diverse immune cells so that at least a few cells can respond (i., e., bind) to any invading microbe.

Indeed, the humoral immune system is capable of generating at least 10 billion structurally distinct antibodies.
At one time it was thought that, because each antibody has a unique amino acid sequence, each must be encoded by a different gene.
However, this "one gene-one antibody" hypothesis could not possibly be correct because the human has only 50,000 to 100,000 genes.
Further study has shown that several mechanisms are responsible for generating antibody diversity: 

1. Multiple germline immunoglobulin genes.
Molecular genetic studies (cloning and DNA sequencing) have shown that, for each heavy and light chain, an individual has 100 to 200 different V segments located contiguously in his/her germline and six different J segments.
In the heavy chain region there are at least 30 D segments.

2. Somatic recombination (VDJ recombination).
As immunoglobulin molecules are formed during B lymphocyte maturation, a specific combination of single V and J segments is selected for the light chain, and another combination of single V, J, and D segments is selected for the heavy chain. 
This is accomplished by specific deletion of the DNA sequences separating the single V, J, and D segments before they are transcribed into mRNA (Fig., 8- 5).
This process is carried out by enzymes called recombinases , which are encoded in part by the RAGI and RAG2 genes.
This "cutting and pasting" process is known as somatic recombination , as opposed to the germline recombination that takes place during meiosis.
Somatic recombination produces a rather unique result:
unlike most other cells of the body, whose DNA composition is identical, mature B lymphocytes vary in terms of their rearranged immunoglobulin DNA sequences.
Because there are many possible combinations of single V, J, and D segments, somatic recombination can generate a large number of different types of antibody molecules.

3. Junctional diversity.
As the V, D, and J regions are assembled, slight variations occur in the position at which they are joined, and small numbers of nucleotides may be deleted or inserted at the junctions joining the regions.
This creates even more variation in antibody amino acid sequence.

4. Somatic hypermutation.
After stimulation by a foreign antigen, the B lymphocytes undergo a "secondary differentiation" process characterized by somatic hypermutation , as mentioned above. 
The mutation rate of the genes encoding the immucoglobulins increases to approximately 1o-3 per base pair per cell division. 
This causes minor variation in the DNA sequences encoding immunoglobulins and thus in their peptide-binding characteristics. 
Somatic hypermutation of the V, D, and J genes produces considerable antibody diversity and may be caused by mutational hotspots in these genes.

5. Multiple combinations of heavy and light chains.
Further diversity is created by the random combination of different heavy and light chains in assembling the immunoglobulin molecule.


Figure 8-5

Somatic recombination in the formation of a heavy chain of an antibody molecule

The functional heavy chain is encoded by only one segment each from the multiple V, D, and J segments.

Each of these mechanisms contributes to antibody diversity. 
Considering all of them together, it has been estimated that as many as 101° to 1014 distinct antibodies can potentially be produced.

Mechanisms that produce antibody diversity include multiple germline gene segments, somatic recombination of the germline gene segments, junctional diversity, somatic hypermutation, and the potential for multiple combinations of heavy and light chains.
