
Products from micro-organisms

Introduction

The biochemical diversity of micro-organisms, illustrated by their ability to grow on a variety of substrates and to produce a wide range of products, has resulted in their commercial exploitation by the fermentation industry.

Microbiologists tend to interpret 'fermentation' as any process for the production of a product by the mass culture of micro-organisms, whereas biochemists use the term in a far more strict sense.
The true biochemical meaning of the word is 'an energy-generating process in which organic compounds act as both electron donors and terminal electron acceptors' (see Section 1.1).

However, in this section 'fermentation' will be used in its broader, microbiological sense.
In recent years the advances in molecular biology and genetic manipulation have given the well-established fermentation industry the opportunity to initiate new processes and to improve existing ones.
These developments have been hailed as the birth of a new era but it should be borne in mind that the exploitation of these major advances depends upon the techniques of large-scale culture that have been built up by the industry over many years.
The objectives of this section are: first, to introduce the reader to the range of commercial fermentation products, and second, to concentrate on the biological principles underlying these processes.

The production of microbial biomass 

The most obvious microbial product of commercial significance is probably microbial biomass (the microbial cells themselves). 
Yeast cells, used in the baking industry, have been produced commercially since the early 1900s, and yeast was also produced as human food in Germany during the First World War.

These early biomass processes were aerobic and, as discussed below, incorporated a considerable degree of process control. 
Although the production of bakers' yeast by fermentation has continued, the First World War production of microbial biomass as human food or animal feed was a relatively isolated event and such systems were not investigated in any great depth until the 1960s.
At that time the biochemical diversity of micro-organisms was exploited by the utilization of a wide variety of organisms capable of growing on a range of carbon sources, including hydrocarbons for the production of microbial biomass termed 'single cell protein' or SCP.
Very few of the processes investigated at that time came to fruition due to economic and political difficulties. 
British Petroleum was probably the early leader in this field and developed its technology to the extent of constructing a commercial plant in Sardinia for the production of yeast biomass from n-alkanes.
However, BP was unable to convince the Italian government of the toxicological safety of its product and the factory never went into production.
Most of the other processes were casualties of the Middle East wars and the subsequent escalation in petroleum product prices.
However, Imperial Chemical Industries perservered with their plans for the production of bacterial biomass ( Methylophilus methylotrophus ) from methanol and eventually established the Pruteen process for the production of high grade protein as an animal feed.
The process utilizes continuous culture (see Chapter 7) on an enormous scale ( 1500 m3) and is an excellent example of the application of good engineering to the design of a microbiological process.
The economics of the production of SCP as animal feed are still marginal, but the technology developed by ICI during the Pruteen project has established the company as a world leader in biotechnology.
ICI are capitalizing on their expertise in large-scale continuous culture by collaborating with Rank Hovis MacDougall on a process for the production of fungal biomass from carbohydrates to be marketed as human food, and the economies of this process should prove more attractive.

The production of microbial products 

The exploitation of the biosynthetic capabilities of micro-organisms has resulted in the establishment of a very large number of commercial processes.

The growth of a micro-organism may result in the production of a range of metabolites, but the predominant type of metabolite synthesized depends upon the nature of the organism, the cultural conditions employed and the growth rate of the producing culture. 
If a micro-organism is introduced into a nutrient medium which supports its growth, the inoculated culture will pass through a number of stages and the system is termed batch culture (see Chapter 7).
Initially, growth does not occur, and this period is referred to as the lag phase and may be considered a period of adaptation.
Following an interval during which the growth rate of the cells gradually increases, the cells grow at a constant, maximum rate and this period is referred to as the log or exponential phase .
As nutrient is exhausted, or toxic metabolites accumulate, the growth rate of the cells deviates from the maximum, and eventually growth ceases and the culture is said to enter the stationary phase .
After a further period of time the viable cell number begins to decline and the culture enters the death phase .

The descriptive terminology of batch culture may be rather misleading when considering the metabolic activity of the culture during the various phases, for although the metabolism of stationary phase cells may be considerably different from that of logarithmic ones, it is by no means stationary. xxx proposed a descriptive terminology of the behaviour of microbial cells which considered the type of metabolism rather than the kinetics of growth.
The term trophophase was used to describe the log, or exponential phase of a culture during which the sole products of metabolism are either essential to growth, such as amino acids, nucleotides, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, carbohydrates etc., or the byproducts of energy-yielding catabolism, such as ethanol, acetone and butanol.
The metabolites produced during the trophophase are described as primary metabolites.
The term idiophase was used to describe the phase of a culture during which products other than primary metabolites are produced and these compounds are termed secondary metabolites.
Secondary metabolites have been defined as compounds which are synthesized by slow-growing or non-growing cells, play no obvious role in cell growth and are taxonomically limited in their distribution. 

The idiophase, therefore, corresponds approximately to the stationary phase of batch culture.

The interrelationships between primary and secondary metabolism are illustrated in Fig. 6.1, from which it may be seen that secondary metabolites tend to be synthesized from the key intermediates and end-products of primary metabolism.

Although the primary metabolic routes shown in Figure 6.1 are common to the vast majority of micro-organisms, each secondary metabolite would be synthesized by only a very small number of microbial taxa.
Also, not all microbial taxa undergo secondary metabolism; it is a common feature of the filamentous bacteria and fungi and the sporulating bacteria, but it is not, for example, a feature of the Enterobacteriaceae.
Thus, although the taxonomic distribution of secondary metabolism is far more limited than that of primary metabolism, the range of different metabolites produced is enormous.
At first sight it may seem anomalous that micro-organisms produce compounds that do not appear to have any metabolic function and are certainly not byproducts of catabolism.
However, many secondary metabolites exhibit antimicrobial properties and, therefore, may be involved in competition in the natural environment; others, since their discevery in idiophase cultures, have been demonstrated to be produced during the trophophase where, it has been claimed, they may act in some regulatory role.
Thus, some 'secondary metabolites' do not meet all the criteria quoted in the earlier definition, which should be considered more as a general description of the phenomenon rather than a true definition.
Indeed, Campbell (1984) claims that the only definitive aspect of this original definition is the taxonomically limited distribution of secondary metabolites. 
Although the interrelationships between primary and secondary metabolism, and the physiological role of the latter group, are the subjects of considerable debate the relevance of these products to the fermentation industry is their commercial significance. 
Some examples of the commercial significance of such products are shown in Table 6.1.

Figure 6-1

Interrelationships between primary and secondary metabolism

The control of the onset of secondary metabolism has been the subject of extensive investigation and, obviously, this is an area of research of considerable interest to the fermentation industry.
The outcome of this work is that there is a considerable amount of information available on the changes occurring in the medium at the onset of secondary metabolism but relatively little is known about the control of the process at the DNA level. 
Primary metabolic precursors of secondary metabolites have been demonstrated to induce their formation; for example, tryptophan in alkaloid biosynthesis and methionine in cephalosporin synthesis.
On the other hand, medium components have been demonstrated to repress secondary metabolism, the earliest observation being that of Soltero and Johnson in 1953 of the repressing effect of glucose on benzylpenicillin formation.
Carbon, nitrogen and phosphate sources which support rapid growth have been variously shown to inhibit secondary metabolite production.
Therefore, it is essential that repressing nutrients be avoided in fermentation media or be provided in sub-repressing levels; these aspects are considered in more detail in Chapter 8.

As mentioned in the introduction, the advent of recombinant DNA technology has extended the potential range of products that may be produced by microorganisms.

Microbial cells may be endowed with the ability to produce compounds normally associated with higher cells and such products may form the bases of new fermentation processes, for example the synthesis of interferon, insulin and renin.
The techniques of in vitro recombinant DNA technology are considered in Chapters 10, 11 and 12.

The biosynthetic and catabolic pathways occurring during primary and secondary biosynthesis are all catalyzed by enzymes. 
As illustrated in Table 6.2, many microbial enzymes have commercial application and are, therefore, also worthwhile commercial fermentation products.
Most wild-type micro-organisms regulate the synthesis of metabolic products such that they are produced only in the amounts necessary to meet the growth requirements of the cells.
However, in a commercial process it is essential to produce these compounds at very high concentrations and, therefore necessary to modify the producing cells and to control their growth environment such that their normal, limiting, control systems are overcome.
The control of the organism's environment and its genetic modification are considered in Chapters 8 and 9.

Microbial transformation processes 

As well as the use of micro-organisms to produce biomass and microbial metabolites, microbial cells may be used to catalyse the conversion of a compound into a structurally similar, financially more valuable, compound.

Although the production of vinegar is the oldest and most well-established transformation process (the conversion of ethanol into acetic acid) the majority of these processes involve the production of high value compounds.
The reactions which may be catalysed include oxidation, dehydrogenation, hydroxylation, dehydration, condensation, decarboxylation, amination, deamination and isomerization.
Microbial processes have the advantage of specificity over the use of chemical reagents and of operating at relatively low temperatures and pressures.
The anomaly of transformation processes is that a large biomass has to be produced to catalyse, perhaps, a single reaction.
Thus, some processes have been streamlined by immobilizing either the cells themselves or the isolated enzymes which catalyze the reaction, on an inert support which may then be utilized as reusable catalysts. 
This aspect is considered in more detail in Chapter 14. 

Table 6-1

Some examples of microbial metabolites of commercial significance

Primary metabolites.
Commercial significance .


Ethanol.
'Active ingredient' in alcoholic beverages Citric acid Various uses in the food industry .


Acetone and butanol.
Solvents .


Glutamic acid.
Flavour enhancer .


Lysine.
Feed additive.


Polysaccharides.
Applications in the food industry; enhanced oil recovery.


Fe.
Ore leaching.


Seconday metabolites.


Penicillin.
Antibiotic.


Tetracyclines .
Antibiotic.


Cephalosporin .
Antibiotic.


Streptomycin.
Antibiotic.


Griseofulv in.
Antifungal antibiotic.


Pepstatin.
Ulcer treatment.


Cyclosporin A.
Immunosuppressant.


Krestin.
Cancer treatment.


Bestatin.
Cancer treatment.


Table 6-2

Some examples of the commercial applications of enzymes

Enzyme.
Microbial Source.
Industry .
Application.


Amylase.
Fungal.
Baking.
Fermentation acceleration, reduction of dough viscosity.


Amylase.
Fungal/bacterial.
Brewing.
Release of soluble sugars in mashing.


Protease.
Fungal/bacterial.
Brewing.
Protection against 'chill haze'.


Amylase.
Fungal/bacterial.
Food.
Manufacture of syrups.


Pectinase.
Fungal.
Food.
Preparation of fruit juices and coffee concentrates .


Protease.
Bacterial.
Laundry.
Enzyme incorporated into washing powders .


The structure of a fermentation process

The central part of a fermentation process is the growth of the industrial organism in an environment which stimulates the synthesis of the desired commercial product.
This is carried out in a fermenter which is, essentially, a large vessel (ranging in size from 1000 to 1.5 million dm3) in which the organism may be maintained at the required temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen concentration and substrate concentration.
However, the actual culturing of the organism in the fermenter is only one of a number of stages in a fermentation process, as indicated in Figure 6.2.
The medium on which the organism is to be grown has to be formulated from its raw materials and sterilized; the fermenter has to be sterilized and inoculated with a viable, metabolically active culture which is capable of producing the required product; after growth, the culture fluid has to be harvested, the cells separated from the supernatant and the product has to be extracted from the relevant fraction (either the cells or the cell-free supernatant) and purified. 
One must also visualize the research and development programme superimposed upon this process.
For a fermentation to be possible in the first place, an acceptable, productive organism must be obtained (normally by screening natural isolates) and its productivity raised to economic levels by medium improvement, mutation, recombination and process design.
Thus, a successful fermentation is based on the skills of microbiologists, biochemists, geneticists, chemical engineers, chemists and control engineers. 

Although this text concentrates on the biological aspects of biotechnology it is essential not to lose sight of the interdisciplinary nature of the subject.

Figure 6-2

The stages in a fermentation process

Culturing micro-organisms

Batch culture

A micro-organism will grow in a culture medium provided that the medium contains all the necessary nutrients in an available form and that all other environmental factors are suitable.
The simplest culture method is batch culture in which the micro-organism is grown on a limited amount of medium until either one essential nutrient component is exhausted or toxic byproducts accumulate to growth-inhibiting levels.
In a batch system the culture will pass through a number of stages, as illustrated in Figure 7.1.

Following inoculation of the culture medium growth does not occur immediately and the period prior to active growth is referred to as the lag phase and may be considered as a period of adaptation.
In a commercial process it is obviously desirable to reduce the lag phase as much as possible, for not only is time wasted but also the medium is consumed in maintaining the culture viable prior to growth.
The length of the lag phase may be reduced by using an exponentially growing, relatively large inoculum ( xxx , by volume) which has itself been grown in the same (or similar) medium to be used in the fermentation. 

Inoculum development

The culture used to inoculate a plant fermenter must be available in sufficient quantity, be in a metabolically active state, free from contaminants and capable of producing the desired product in subsequent culture.
However, if, for example, the production fermenter were xxx then the volume of the inoculum should be between xxx and xxx .
This volume of culture would have to be built up from an initial stock culture of a few xxx which would involve a large number of successive seed fermentations of progressively increasing scale.
However, there is a conflict between using the 'optimum' inoculum volume and producing an inoculum that is pure and free from degenerate strains (that is, cells which have lost the ability to produce the desired product), because the greater the number of stages between the stock culture and the final fermentation the greater is the risk of contamination and strain degeneration.
Also, very considerable capital outlay would be required to provide the inoculum development fermenters.
If the fermentation plant contains a large number of production scale fermenters, one series of inoculum development vessels may be adequate to supply all the inoculum needs, which would reflect reasonable return on investment.
However, if the production plant consisted of just one very large continuous culture vessel then it would hardly be economic to construct an inoculum fermenter, one-tenth of the capacity of the production vessel, which would be used only infrequently.
Thus, a compromise is reached between the size of the inoculum used, the probabilities of contamination and strain degeneration, and the investment costs involved.

Figure 7.1

Schematic representation of the growth of a micro-organism in batch culture

Many industrially important fermentation organisms are filamentous and are capable of producing asexual spores. 
Such organisms include Penicillium chysogenum (used for commercial penicillin production), Aspergillus niger (used for the commercial production of organic acids) and some of the actinomycetes (used for the commercial production of a range of antibotics and other products).

The property of asexual spore production is extremely useful in the development of inoculum because a relatively small biomass may be used to produce a very high concentration of microbial propagules.
Stanbury and Whitaker (1984) discuss the use of spore inocula in detail, but the major points will be summarized here.
Mycelial organisms will sporulate profusely on agar-solidified media, or on the surface of cereal grains, and bath culture methods are used for the production of spore inocula for industrial purposes. 
Butterworth (1984) described the use of a Roux bottle giving approximately xxx of agar surface for the sporulation of Streptomyces clavuligerus (used for the commercial production of clavulanic acid, an inhibitor of p-lactamase).
The spores produced from one such vessel could be used to inoculate a xxx seed fermentation, which was subsequently used to inoculate a xxx production fermenter cite the use of flasks of millet for the production of spores of Streptomyces aureofaciens in the commercial production of chlortetracycline.
Many fungi will sporulate in submergod culture (that is, in a stirred fermenter) provided that the optimum medium is utilized; for example, Penicillium patulum spores are produced in submerged culture in the inoculum development programme for the commercial production of griseofulvin.

The filamentous nature of many commercially important organisms does present considerable problems to the fermentation technologist. 
A filamentous organism may give rise to various growth forms in submerged liquid culture, only some of which may be desirable for the commercial process.
These growth forms range from long filaments homogeneously distributed through the medium to discrete, compact pellets of mycelium suspended in the broth.
The filamentous type of habit gives rise to an extremely viscous broth which may be very difficult to aerate adequately, whereas the pellet type of habit gives rise to a far less viscous, but also less homogeneous, broth.
In a pelleted culture the mycelium at the centre of the pellets may be starved of nutrients and oxygen due to diffusion limitations. 
Also, there is considerable evidence that the morphological form of the organism influences the productivity of the culture, but whether this is due to the phenomena already mentioned or to some form of metabolic control is far from clear.
Thus, some fermentations are carried out with the organism in a filamentous habit whereas others are carried out with the organism growing as pellets.
For example, filamentous growth has been claimed to be optimum for penicillin production from P. Chrysogenum whereas pelleted growth has been claimed to be optimum for citric acid production from A. Niger .
The necessity for filamentous growth is takon to the extreme in the xxx mycoprotein process where Fusarium graminearium is produced for human consumption. 
A highly filamentous morphology is required to produce the desired texture in the product which resembles the strength and eating texture of white and soft red meats.

Thus, in this process a median hyphal length of xxx is required.

The relevance of this consideration of mycelial morphology to inoculum development is that the morphology may be influenced considerably by the concentration of spores used as inoculum for the fermentation.
A high spore concentration tends to give rise to a filamentous habit, whereas a relatively low spore concentration tends to give rise to a pelleted one.
Also, the nature of the medium used in the inoculum development programme will influence the morphological form.
Although the vast majority of the information in the literature relates to the morphology of fungi in submerged culture, the subject is probably equally important in the actinomycete fermentations. 

Figure 7.2 includes some examples of commercial inoculum development programmes, from which it may be seen that the nature of the programme varies quite considerably depending on the process and it must be remembered that the success of an inoculum development system is judged by the productivity of the developed culture in the subsequent fermentation.
From the above account it should be obvious that it is extremely undesirable to use cells from one production fermentation to inoculate the next one; the procedure is that an inoculum is built up from the original stock culture for each fermentation run.
However, there are two exceptions to this rule and these are the brewing of beer and of vinegar.
In the production of vinegar by batch fermentation using acetic acid bacteria cells from the end of a fermentation are used to inoculate the next one by withdrawing approximately 60% of the culture and restoring the original volume with fresh medium.
The production organism is extremely sensitive to oxygen limitation and it is crucial to have a rapidly growing culture; also, the risks of contamination and strain degeneration are less due to the highly selective environment of the vinegar fermentation.
In traditional ale breweries it has been common practice to inoculate (or pitch, in brewing terms) a fermentation with yeast obtained from a previous fermentation, and this procedure may continue for many years.
However, as early as 1896 Hansen developed a system for the production of pure inocula for the brewing of lager.

In most modern ale breweries inoculation from brow to brew is now relatively limited but it is still practised in many of the small, traditional breweries and it should be added that the quality of their product is usually exceptional!

Logarithmic or exponential growth

Provided that an active inoculum is used (as described above) the length of the lag phase may be minimized and the growth rate of the cells gradually increases.

Eventually, the cells grow at a constant, maximum rate and this period is referred to as the log, or exponential phase which may be described by the equation: xxx where x is the cell concentration ( xxx ) this the time of incubation (h)is the specific growth rate ( xxx ).
On integration, equation (1) gives: xxx where xxx is the cell concentration at time xxx is the cell concentration after a time interval of xxx .
On taking natural logarithms of equation (2) we obtain: xxx .

Figure 7.2

Some representative examples of commercial inoculum development pro Grammes

(a) Clavulanic acid production by Streptomyces clavuligerus .
(b) Chlortetracycline production by Streptomyres aureofaciens .
(c) Sagamycin production by Streptomyces sp .

Thus, a plot of the natural logarithm of the cell concentration against time gives a straight line, the slope of which equals xxx , the specific growth rate.
During the exponential phase the specific growth rate is constant, and maximum for the operating conditions and is thus termed Max the maximum specific growth rate.

The growth of an organism in batch culture may also be described by simple algebra using the term doubling time, td, which is the time taken for a cell to divide.
If a culture medium were inoculated with one viable cell, and this cell was capable of growing at the maximum rate without any intervening lag phase, then the sequential increase in cell number that would be observed would be: xxx .
This sequential increase may be represented by expressing the cell numbers to the base two, thus: xxx .
The exponents (or power numbers or indices) in this series represent the number of generations which have past, thus after xxx generations there will be xxx cells in the culture.
If the medium were inoculated with No cells then the number of cells, xxx , present after n generations would be: xxx .
On taking logarithms to the base xxx , equation (3) becomes: xxx .
Thus xxx .

Although the term doubling time is relatively little used in microbial physiology it may be useful to convert values for specific growth rate to doubling time to obtain a better appreciation of the meaning of these values.

The equation derived for doubling time, using number of cells may also be derived using cell concentration, thus: xxx .
It has already been shown that: xxx .
If, in this equation xxx Therefore xxx .

Thus, a specific growth rate of xxx is equivalent to a doubling time of xxx .
Table 7.1 gives some representative values of xxx for a range of micro-organisms. 

Equations (2) and (3) ignore the facts that growth results in the depletion of nutrients and the accumulation of toxic byproducts and thus predict that growth continues indefinitely.
However, as substrate is exhausted or toxic byproducts accumulate the specific growth rate of the cells deviates from the maximum, growth eventually ceases and the culture enters the stationary phase.

The decrease in growth rate and the cessation of growth due to the depletion of substrate may be described by the relationship between ~ and the residual limiting substrate concentration. 
The limiting substrate is that component of the medium which is the first to become exhausted.
Monad (1942) demonstrated the following relationship: where s is the residual concentration of the limiting substrate, and Ks is the utilization or saturation constant for the limiting substrate and is equivalent to the substrate concentration when M is half xxx .

Equation (8) is represented graphically in Fig. 7.3 where zone B to C is equivalent to the exponential phase of batch culture with substrate in excess and growth at xxx .
The zone A to B is equivalent to the deceleration in the growth rate from the end of the exponential phase to the onset of the stationary phase.
The numerical value of Ks reflects the organism's affinity for its substrate-a high K, value indicates a low affinity and a low R; value indicates a high affinity.
Thus, if the organism has a very high affinity for the limiting substrate (low Ks value) the specific growth rate in batch culture will not be affected until the substrate concentration has declined to a very low level.
Thus, such an organism would display only a very short deceleration phase.
Likewise, if an organism has a very low affinity for the limiting substrate (a high Ks value) the specific growth rate will decrease at a relatively high substrate concentration and, therefore, such an organism would display a long deceleration phase.
Some representative values for K, of a range of organisms and substrates are given in Table 7.2.

Table 7.1

Representative values of xxx for a range of micro-organisms (obtained under the conditions specified in the references)

Figure 7.3

The effect of residual limiting substrate concentration on the specific growth rate of a micro-organism

The amount of biomass at the stationary phase is dependent on the composition of the medium and the efficiency of the organism in converting the substrates into cells.
Ideally, the medium should be designed such that growth is limited by the exhaustion of a single substrate rather than by the accumulation of toxin.
The concentration of cells at the stationary phase is then given by the ecuation: xxx , where xxx is the cell concentration, Y is the yield factor for the limiting substrate (g of biomass per g of substrate consumed), xxx is the original substrate concentration in the medium. 

Table 7.2

Some representative values of xxx for a range of organisms and substrates

The term Y is a measure of the cell efficiency in converting substrate into biomass.
The biomass at any point in the batch culture is given by the equation: xxx where s is the residual substrate concentration at that point in time.
Thus, xxx therefore, provided that cell and substrate concentration are in the same units, Y is a dimensionless constant.
The value of Y will obviously depend on organism and substrate and the importance of this value is discussed in more detail in 8.3.1.

Continuous culture

If a culture medium is designed such that the cessation of growth is due to the exhaustion of a medium component (that is, substrate limited) rather than by the accumulation of toxins then exponential growth in batch culture may be prolonged by the addition of fresh medium to the culture vessel.
This procedure may be repeated several times until the vessel is full. 
However, if an overflow were to be installed in the side of the fermenter such that the addition of fresh medium displaced an equal volume of culture then continuous production of cells could be achieved.
If medium were added continuously to such a system at a suitable rate the displacement of culture may be balanced by the production of new biomass, and thus a steady state may be achieved.
The growth of the cells in a continuous culture of this type is controlled by the availability of the growth-limiting chemical component in the medium, and the system is described as a chemostat.
It is important to appreciate that any component of the medium may be made the growth-limiting nutrient, and that the nature of the limitation will affect markedly the physiology and biochemistry of the cells. 

The control of the environment of the process organism

Introduction

The environment provided for the growth of the process organism must be controlled during the fermentation such that maximum (and reliable) productivity may be achieved.
The important environmental factors are:

(1) The chemical environment of the organism should be such that it supports optimum product formation commensurate with the economics of the process.
(2) The temperature of the process should be optimum for product formation.
(3) The culture should be maintained in a pure state throughout the fermentation.

These environmental factors are influenced by the following:

(1) the design of the fermenter and the conditions under which it is operated;
(2) the design of the culture medium;
(3) the mode of operation of the fermentation.

Fermenter design and operation 

A detailed consideration of fermenter design is outside the scope of this book which concentrates on the biological principles of biotechnology.
However, fermentation technology is an amalgam of biology and chemical engineering and, therefore, it is necessary to give a brief summary of the types of fermenter available and their major design features.
Whitaker listed the following 13 points considered to be important criteria in the design of a fermenter:

(1) The vessel should be capable of being operated aseptically for a number of days and should be reliable in long-term operation.
(2) Adequate aeration and agitation should be provided to meet the metabolic requirements of the micro-organism.
(3) Power consumption should be as low as possible. 
(4) A system of pH control should be provided.
(5) Sampling facilities should be provided.
(6) A system of temperature control should be provided. 
(7) Evaporation losses from the fermenter should not be excessive.
(8) The vessel should be designed to require the minimal use of labour in operation, harvesting, cleaning and maintenance. 
(9) The vessel should be suitable for a range of processes. 
(10) The vessel should be constructed to ensure smooth internal surfaces, using welds instead of flange joints wherever possible.
(11) The vessel should be of similar geometry to both smaller and larger vessels in the plant or pilot plant to facilitate scale-up.
(12) The cheapest materials that enable satisfactory results to be achieved should be used.
(13) There should be adequate service provisions for the fermenter.

The maintenance of an aseptic environment and the provision of aerobic conditions are probably the two most important criteria to be considered.
The most widely used industrial scale fermenters are stirred, baffled, aerated tanks provided with systems of temperature, xxx and foam formation control. 
A schematic representation of such a fermenter is shown in Figure 8.1.
Although the vast majority of fermenters in commercial operation rely on mechanical agitation to achieve good mixing and oxygen transfer some fermenters rely upon very high gas inputs without mechanical agitation.
Figure 8.2 illustrates some examples of non-mechanically stirred vessels, the most well-known of which is probably that used for the ICI Pruteen process.

Figure 8.1

Schematic representation of a stirred, aerated fermenter

Figure 8.2

Some examples of non-mechanically agitated fermentation systems

(a) Cyclone fermenter.
(b) Air-lift fermenter with external loop.
(c) ICI air-lift fermenter with internal loop.
(d) Vogelbusch deep-jet fermenter.

Oxygen transfer

Oxygen is a sparingly soluble gas (a saturated oxygen solution contains approximately xxx oxygen) and provision is achieved by sparging air into the vessel throughout the fermentation. 
The transfer of oxygen into solution is described by the equation: xxx where CL is the dissolved oxygen concentration ( xxx )t is time xxx is the saturated dissolved oxygen concentration ( xxx ) is the mass transfer coefficient ( xxx ).

(1)a is the gas/liquid interface area per unit volume xxx the oxygen transfer rate ( xxx ).

The terms xxx . and a are very difficult to measure in a fermentation and, therefore, the two terms are combined in the expression xxx or the volumetric transfer coefficient which is used as a measure of the aeration capacity of a fermenter. 
The value of K, a is affected by the design of the vessel, the degree of agitation in a stirred vessel (measured by the amount of power consumed in stirring the vessel contents), the air flow rate, the viscosity of the culture broth and the presence of antifoam agents in the medium.
Thus, the design of the fermenter and the operating conditions employed must be such that the organism's oxygen demand is met.
However, it should be appreciated that the dissolved oxygen concentration in the medium has a marked influence on the physiology of an aerobic organism.
Thus, the xxx of the fermenter must be such that the desired amount of oxygen can be transferred per unit time (and therefore meet the oxygen demand of the organism) in the presence of a certain dissolved oxygen concentration in the medium (which maintains the cells in the correct physiological form).

The effect of dissolved oxygen concentration on the specific oxygen uptake rate ( xxx of oxygen per g dry weight of xxx ) is of the Michaelis- Menten (or Monod) type of relationship, as shown in Fig. 8.3.
From Fig. 8.3 it may be seen that as the dissolved oxygen concentration is increased the specific oxygen uptake rate increases up to a maximum rate. 
The lowest dissolved oxygen concentration at which the specific oxygen uptake rate is maximum is termed xxx .
Thus, to maintain the culture in a fully aerobic state the fermenter must be capable of maintaining the dissolved oxygen concentration above xxx , some representative values of which are given in Table 8.1.

However, the optimum aeration conditions for microbial product formation may be different from those giving maximum biomass production.
Thus, it may be necessary to operate a fermenter at a dissolved oxygen concentration either below or above xxx .

Figure 8.3

The effect of dissolved oxygen on the specific oxygen uptake rate of a microbial culture

Table 8.1

Critical dissolved oxygen concentrations of some representative micro-organisms

The production of commercial alcohol from yeast is an obvious example of the dissolved oxygen concentration being kept below xxx .
Although the production of alcohol is considered to be an anaerobic process, oxygen is still required for the synthesis of the sterol and unsaturated fatty acid components of the yeast membrane.
Thus, the fermenter for such a system need only be designed for the provision of relatively low amounts of oxygen.

An excellent example of the effects of dissolved oxygen concentration on the production of amino acids is provided by the work of Hirose and Shibai (1980).

These workers demonstrated that the xxx , for Brevibacterium flavum was xxx and represented the degree of oxygen supply as the extent of oxygen 'satisfaction'—the respiratory rate of the culture expressed as a fraction of the maximum respiratory rate.
Therefore, a value of oxygen satisfaction below I indicated that the dissolved oxygen concentration was below xxx .
The production of members of the glutamate and aspartate families of amino acids was affected detrimentally by oxygen satisfaction values of below 1, whereas optimum phenylalanine, valine and leucine productivities occurred at satisfaction levels of xxx and xxx respectively. 
The biosynthetic routes of these amino acids are shown in Figure 8.4, from which it may be seen that phenylalanine, valine and leucine are derived from the glycolysis intermediates, phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate, whereas the glutamate and aspartate families are derived from TCA cycle intermediates.
Thus, oxygen limitation and the concomitant reduction in the operation of the xxx cycle would result in more intermediates being available for phenylalanine, leucine and valine biosynthesis. 
On the other hand, complete oxygen satisfaction results in a fully operational xxx cycle and, therefore, a ready supply of glutamate and aspartate family precursors.

Figure 8.4

The biosynthetic routes to selected amino acids in Brevibacterium flavum

The production of cephalosporin by Cephalosporium sp. was optimum at dissolved oxygen concentrations considerably higher than the xxx value for the producing strain.
Thus, in this case the fermenter would have to be capable of providing a higher dissolved oxygen concentration than that necessary to support the culture in acrobic conditions. 

The rheological properties of the fermentation broth have a marked influence on the xxx , a achievable in the fermenter. 
A unicellular organism will normally give rise to a broth with a relatively low viscosity, unaffected by the degree of agitation in the vessel—that is, a Newtonian fluid.
However, a mycelial organism will often produce a highly viscous broth, the viscosity of which varies with the degree of agitation—that is, a non-Newtonian fluid.
The most common type of non-Newtonian mycelial broth is described as a pseudoplastic—that is, the viscosity of the broth decreases with increasing agitation.
The degree of agitation in a stirred fermenter will vary through the volume of the vessel—the highest will occur in the region of the agitator, and the lowest in the regions most distant from the agitator.
Thus, broth in the central zone of the fermenter will tend to be the least viscous which may result in the sparged air rising through this region of least resistance and anaerobic conditions developing in the more viscous regions.
Therefore, it is important that in such a fermentation the agitation regime is one that results in good oxygen transfer in a region of high shear but also circulates the broth through the high shear zone. 
One approach to this problem is to use two different types of agitation in the system—one designed to produce a high shear zone, and the other to pump the broth.
Legrys and Solomon (1977) designed a fermenter with a bottom-mounted disc turbine and a top-mounted curve blade impeller.
The turbine produces a high degree of turbulence while the impeller produces a high flow velocity resulting in the circulation of one tank volume every xxx .

Thus, the mycelium is circulated through the aeration zone of the vessel before it becomes oxygen limited.
Marsh and Pinkney (1985) described the pilot process for the cultivation of Fusarium graminearum used for the production of xxx mycoprotein.
As already discussed (see Chapter 7.1) the filamentous structure of the organism is critically important to the eating quality of many of the products made from mycoprotein and, therefore, the fermenter must be capable of aerating a highly viscous non-Newtonian broth.
The xxx pilot fermenter uses an impeller with a six-blade Rushton turbine producing oxygen transfer and a three-blade sabre giving rapid circulation within the vessel. 

Maintenance of aseptic conditions

It is essential that a fermenter and its contents are sterilized prior to the fermentation and maintained aseptic throughout the fermentation period.
The achievement of aseptic conditions is, fundamentally, an engineering problem and is therefore outside the scope of this text, but the major points will be summarized to familiarize the reader with this important area.

(1) In an agitated vessel the agitator drive shaft must enter the vessel via an aseptic seal.

(2) The fermenter must be constructed such that it, and its contents, may be steam-sterilizable.
Thus steam must be supplied at each entry or exit point of the vessel. 
During sterilization steam is introduced through all the entry and exit points, with the exception of the air outlet from which steam is allowed to escape.

(3) The air supply should be filter sterilized. 

(4) During the fermentation the vessel should be operated at a positive pressure so that any leakage results in air leaving the fermenter rather than contaminated air from outside being drawn in.

(5) The vessel should be designed such that it may be inocculated, sampled and additions made aseptically.


The operations of sterilization and aseptic addition on an industrial plant are complex procedures involving the manipulation of, perhaps, hundreds of valves.

Thus, the probability of human error is relatively large. 
However, the advent of computer control has proved to be an enormous asset in the control and monitoring of sterilization and aseptic operations.
According to Tonge (1980) the operation of the xxx Pruteen plant would be extremely difficult without computer control.

The design of the culture medium

The culture medium which is used in a fermentation must not only meet the requirements of the micro-organism, but also those of the industrial process.

Thus, such factors as its cost, efficiency of utilization, rheology and its effect on downstream processing are all important factors in the design of a fermentation medium.

All micro-organisms require water, sources of carbon, nitrogen, mineral elements and, possibly, specific requirements such as vitamins and amino acids.
The vast majority of commercially significant micro-organisms are chemo-organotrophic and, therefore, the energy and carbon sources are one and the same.
Carbon and nitrogen are usually supplied as complex mixtures of cheap natural products or byproducts of some process.
The trace elements are often present in the complex components as well as in the tap water used to formulate the medium.
Any specific requirements, such as amino acids or vitamins, may be added in pure form but it is more likely that will be supplied more economically as a complex plant or animal extract.
Phosphates may be incorporated into the medium as buffering agents although external xxx control is normally used. 
Table 8.2 includes some examples of carbon and nitrogen sources commonly used in fermentation media and Table 8.3 includes some examples of industrial media formulations.

Yield of biomass

The yield of biomass obtainable per unit of carbon incorporated into the medium is an important criterion in the choice of carbon source, especially for single- cell protein processes.
The cellular yield coefficient (Y) for a carbon source is described as: The quantity of dry cell matter produced, The quantity of carbon substrate utilized.

Some representative values of Y are given in Table 8.4 from which it may be seen that some hydrocarbons give better yield coefficients than carbohydrates.
The reason for this is that the highly reduced hydrocarbons contain more carbon per g of compound than do the carbohydrates.
However, the improved yield is 'paid for' by the high oxygen demand of cells growing on these highly reduced carbon compounds, also shown in Table 8.4.
Therefore, far more oxygen has to be provided to a hydrocarbon-based fermentation than to a carbohydrate-based one.

Also, the consumption of large amounts of oxygen results in the generation of considerable heat which must be removed to maintain the temperature of the fermentation at the optimum value.

Table 8.2

Some examples of carbon and nitrogen sources commonly used in fermentation media

Table 8.3

Some examples of industrial fermentation media

Table 8.4

Some examples of yield factors for a range of carbon sources and micro-organisms

Thus, the choice of carbon source has a major effect on the design of the fermentation vessel which has to provide sufficient oxygen for complete utilization of the carbon source and a sufficient heat exchange area to remove the heat produced. 
An excellent example of this is the ICI Pruteen fermenter. 

Inducers

Besides providing substrate for the growth of the process organism the medium will have a very considerable influence on the products produced by the organism.
Catabolic enzymes are frequently inducible, that is they are only produced in the presence of an inducer which is normally the substrate of the enzyme or a structurally similar compound.
Thus, a medium for the commercial production of a catabolic enzyme must include the relevant inducer.
Table 8.5 cites some examples of commercially relevant enzymes and inducer systems.

The production of certain secondary metabolites has also been shown to be subject to control by induction.
For example, a-mannosidase is a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of streptomycin and is induced in the presence of yeast mannan. 

Thus, yeast extract is often used as a nitrogen source in the streptomycin fermentation.

Table 8.5

Some examples of inducers used in the production of commercially relevant enzymes

Repressors

The production of catabolic enzymes and secondary metabolites is frequentlyrepressed by the presence of certain compounds in the culture medium.

Rapidly utilized carbon sources have been demonstrated to repress the formation of amylases and a wide range of secondary metabolites, for example, griseofulvin, penicillin, bacitracin and actinomycin.
After many years of empirical medium development most antibiotics are produced using carbon sources other than D- glucose, or, if D-glucose is used it is fed to the culture at a low rate.

Nitrogen sources have also been demonstrated to have repressive effects on secondary metabolite production.
For example, the fact that soybean meal and proline are the best nitrogen sources for streptomycin production is probably due to their slow utilization, thus avoiding nitrogen metabolite repression. 

Another common repressor of secondary metabolism is inorganic phosphate as demonstrated in the streptomycin, bacitracin, oxytetracycline and novobiocin fermentations.

Thus, the choice of the limiting factor (the component which is exhausted first and therefore limits growth) in a fermentation medium will be determined by the repressive effects of the medium constituents on productivity.
Therefore, depending on the control system involved, commercial media may be carbon, phosphate or nitrogen limited or, occasionally, limited by some other repressing nutrient component.

Precursors

The productivity of a certain metabolite may be increased considerably if a precursor of the metabolite is fed to the system. 
The classical example of this situation is the addition of phenylacetic acid to the penicillin fermentation which acts as the precursor of the side chain of benzylpenicillin.
Further examples are provided by the precursor role of chloride ion in the chlortetracycline and griscofulvin fermentations. 

The mode of operation of fermentation processes

As discussed earlier in Chapter 7 micro-organisms may be grown in batch, fed- batch and continuous culture.
Although continuous culture offers the greatest degree of control over the growth and physiology of the cells, its use by the fermentation industry is extremely limited, for the reasons outlined previously (see Section 7.4).
However, the adoption of fed-batch culture has given the fermentation technologist a valuable tool for the control of the environment of the fermentation.
The most common type of fed-batch system employed in mass culture is to feed one component of the medium to the fermentation, the feed rate being controlled by some measurable parameter of the fermentation.
The most common substrate to be fed is the carbon source but any component that has a critical controlling effect on the fermentation may be used.
The most common measurable parameters used to control the feed rate are dissolved oxygen concentration and pH, although off-line analyses such as viscosity may be used as control parameters.
The major advantage of feeding a medium component to a culture, rather than incorporating it entirely in the initial batch, is that the nutrient may be maintained at a very low concentration during the fermentation.

A low (but constantly replenished) nutrient level may be advantageous in:

(1) Maintaining conditions in the culture within the aeration capacity of the fermenter.

(2) Removing the repressive effects of medium components such as rapidly used carbon, nitrogen and phosphate sources. 

(3) Avoiding the toxic effects of an essential medium component.

(4) Providing a limiting level of a required nutrient for an auxotrophic mutant.


The earliest example of the commercial use of fed-batch culture is the production of bakers' yeast.
It was recognized as early as 1915 that an excess of malt in the production medium would result in a high rate of biomass production and an oxygen demand which could not be met by the fermenter.
This resulted in the development of anaerobic conditions and the formation of ethanol at the expense of biomass.
The solution to this problem was to grow the yeast initially on a weak medium and then add additional concentrated medium at a rate less than the organism could use it.
It is now appreciated that a high glucose concentration represses respiratory activity and in modern yeast production plants the feed of molasses is under strict control based on the automatic measurement of traces of ethanol in the exhaust gas of the fermenter.
As soon as ethanol is detected the feed rate is reduced.
Although such systems result in lower growth rates than the maximum obtainable the biomass yield is nearly the theoretical obtainable.

The penicillin fermentation provides a very good example of the use of fed-batch culture for the production of a secondary metabolite.
The penicillin fermentation is a 'two-stage' process; an initial growth phase is followed by the production phase or idiophase.
During the production phase glucose is fed to the fermentation at a rate which allows a relatively high growth rate (and therefore rapid accumulation of biomass), yet limits the oxygen demand to that which can be met by the fermenter.
The feed rate is controlled by either the dissolved oxygen concentration or the pH of the broth.
If the dissolved oxygen concentration drops below xxx , (see Section 8.2) the flow rate is decreased.
If pH is used to monitor the system a decline in the pH value would indicate the production of organic acids and, therefore, anaerobic conditions.

Thus, a decline in the pH dictates a decrease in the glucose addition rate.

During the production phase the biomass must be maintained at a relatively low growth rate and, thus, the glucose is fed at a low rate which keeps it below the concentration which represses penicillin formation (see Section 8.3.3).
During this phase the dissolved oxygen concentration is used as a 'feedback' control of the addition rate.
Phenylacetic acid is a precursor of penicillin G (benzylpenicillin) (see Section 8.3.4) but is also toxic to the fungus above a threshold concentration.
Thus, phenylacetic acid is also fed to the fermentation during the production phase thereby maintaining its concentration below the toxic level.

In Chapter 9 the use of auxotrophic mutants is discussed for the production of microbial products.
Such mutants are capable of growth only when supplied with certain compounds not needed by the wild-type cells.
Furthermore, to achieve optimum productivity of the desired product the growth of an auxotrophic mutant should be limited by the availability of the required compound.
Thus, the feeding of the required compound to the fermentation at a rate less than that at which it may be consumed enables the fermentation technologist to control the process within relatively narrow margins.

Summary

The performance of a process organism is affected markedly by its environment.

The environment of the organism is influenced by the mode of operation, and design of both the fermenter and the culture medium.
A fermenter is designed to maintain the culture in a pure state under optimum physical and chemical conditions throughout the fermentation.
The provision of oxygen to the organism must be such that product formation is optimum which may mean that the dissolved oxygen concentration has to be different from that supporting optimum growth.

The medium used in the fermentation should contain all necessary requirements for growth as well as additives that may be needed to support optimum product synthesis.
The environment of the organism may be influenced considerably by the mode of operation of the fermentation, the most common type of which is fed- batch culture.
Fed-batch systems allow the fermentation technologist to maintain aerobic conditions, to control the repressing effects of medium components and to provide essential, but sometimes toxic materials, in low concentrations.

Thus, the maintenance of a controlled environment requires a combination of biological and chemical engineering expertise. 
