
THE MAGIC OF MICROARRAYS

Research tools known as DNA microarrays are already clarifying the molecular roots of health and disease and speeding drug discovery.
They could also hasten the day when custom-tailored treatment plans replace a one-size-fits-all approach to health care.

Most people stricken with a cancer called diffuse large B cell lymphoma initially respond well to standard therapy.
Yet in more than half of cases, the cancer soon roars back lethally. 
Physicians have long assumed that the reason some individuals succumb quickly while others do well is that the disease actually comes in different forms caused by distinct molecular abnormalities. 
But until two years ago, investigators had no way to spot the patients who had the most virulent version and thus needed to consider the riskiest, most intensive treatment.

Then a remarkable tool known as a DNA microarray, or DNA chip, broke the impasse.
It enabled a team of researchers from the National Institutes of Health, Stanford University and elsewhere to distinguish between known long- and short-term survivors based on differences in the overall pattern of activity exhibited by hundreds of genes in their malignant cells at the time of diagnosis.
That achievement should lead to a diagnostic test able to identify the patients in greatest danger.

DNA microarrays, first introduced commercially in 1996, are now mainstays of drug discovery research, and more than 20 companies sell them or the instruments or software needed to interpret the information they provide.
The devices are also beginning to revolutionize how scientists explore the operation of normal cells in the body and the molecular aberrations that underlie medical disorders.
The tools promise as well to pave the way for faster, more accurate diagnoses of many conditions and to help doctors personalize medical care-that is, tailor therapies to the exact form of disease in each person and select the drugs likely to work best, with the mildest side effects, in those individuals.

Tiny Troupers

The arrays come in several varieties, but all assess the composition of genetic material in a tissue sample, and all consist of a lawn of single-stranded DNA molecules (probes) that are tethered to a wafer often no bigger than a thumbprint.
These chips also capitalize on a very handy property of DNA: complementary base pairing.

DNA is the material that forms the more than 30,000 genes in human cells-the sequences of code that constitute the blueprints for proteins.
It is built from four building blocks, usually referred to by the first letter of their distinguishing chemical bases: A, C, G and T.
The base A in one strand of DNA will pair only with T (A's complement) on another strand, and C will pair only with G.
Hence, if a DNA molecule from a tissue sample binds to a probe having the sequence ATCGGC, an observer will be able to infer that the molecule from the sample has the complementary sequence: TAGCCG.
RNA, which is DNA's chemical cousin, also follows a strict base-pairing rule when binding to DNA, so the sequence of any RNA strand that pairs up with DNA on a microarray can be inferred as well.

Complementary base-pairing reactions have been integral to many biological tests for years.
But amazingly, DNA microarrays can track tens of thousands of those reactions in parallel on a single chip.
Such tracking is possible because each kind of probe-be it a gene or a shorter sequence of code-sits at an assigned spot within a checkerboardlike grid on the chip and because the DNA or RNA molecules that get poured over the array carry a fluorescent tag or other label that can be detected by a scanner.
Once a chip has been scanned, a computer converts the raw data into a color-coded readout.

Scientists rely on DNA microarrays for two very different purposes.
So-called genotype applications compare the DNA on a chip with DNA in a tissue sample to determine which genes are in the sample or to decipher the order of code letters in as yet unsequenced strings of DNA.
Frequently, however, investigators these days use the devices to assess not merely the presence or sequence of genes in a sample but the expression, or activity level, of those genes.
A gene is said to be expressed when it is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA) and translated into protein.
Messenger RNA molecules are the mobile transcripts of genes and serve as the templates for protein synthesis.

Gene Hunters

Researchers have employed the genotype approach to compare the genes in different organisms (to find clues to the evolutionary history of the organisms, for example) and to compare the genes in tumors with those in normal tissues (to uncover subtle differences in gene composition or number).
One day gene comparisons performed on DNA chips could prove valuable in medical practice as well.

Carefully designed arrays could, for instance, announce the precise cause of infection in a patient whose flulike symptoms (such as aches, high fever and breathing difficulty) do not point to one clear culprit.
A surface could be arrayed with DNA representing genes that occur only in selected disease-causing agents, and a medical laboratory could extract and label DNA from a sample of infected tissue (perhaps drawn from the person's nasal passages).
Binding of the patient's DNA to some gene sequence on the chip would indicate which of the agents was at fault.
Similarly, chips now being developed could signal that bioterrorists have released specific types of anthrax or other exotic germs into a community.

For better or worse, gene-detecting microarrays could also identify an individual's genetic propensity to a host of disorders. 
Most genetic differences in people probably take the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs (pronounced "snips"), in which a single DNA letter substitutes for another. 
A chip bearing illness-linked gene variants could be constructed to reveal an individual's SNPs and thus predict the person's likelihood of acquiring Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, specific cancers and so on.
Those people at greatest risk could then receive close monitoring, intensive preventive care and early intervention.
Whether these kinds of tests would appeal to the public is an open question, though;
the downside of such knowledge can be increased anxiety and the potential for discrimination by employers and insurers.

Other valuable information provided by SNP chips would pose no threat to people's mental state, employability or insurability. 
The gene variants we possess influence how our bodies process the medicines we take, which in turn influences the effectiveness of the drugs and the intensity of their side effects.
Chips that highlighted our unique genetic sensitivities would help physicians choose the drugs that work best and pose the fewest dangers in each of us.
SNP chips displaying genetic mutations that increase the aggressiveness of tumors might also help pathologists determine whether benign-looking tumors are actually fiercer than they seem based on microscopic analyses. 
Both types of arrays are already being investigated for use in medical care.

Choice Expressions

As exciting as such applications are, it is the other major use of arrays-expression profiling-that has increasingly captivated researchers over the past few years.
Laboratory workers produce these profiles by measuring the amounts of different mRNAs in a tissue sample.
Generally, the more copies of mRNA a cell makes, the more copies of protein it will make, so the quantities of the various mRNAs in a sample can indirectly indicate the types and amounts of proteins present.
Proteins are often of interest because they control and carry out most activities in our bodies' cells and tissues.
Chips that directly measure protein levels are being developed [see box on page 52], but constructing them remains challenging.

By using the genome as a sensor pad to detect activity changes in a cell's various genes, scientists can gain exquisitely detailed "snapshots" of how a cell's functions have been altered by drugs or disease states.
At times, knowing the overall on-off pattern of gene activity in a sample can actually be more useful than knowing which particular genes turn on and off in response to some influence.
In those cases, as will be seen, the pattern serves as a shorthand "signature" reflecting the molecular state of a sample under some specific condition. 

Expression profiling has proved invaluable on many fronts. 
Cell biologists like it because knowledge of the proteins that predominate after a tissue is exposed to different conditions can provide insight into how the tissue normally compensates for disruptions and what goes wrong when diseases develop.

These scientists are also using expression arrays to learn the functions of genes that have been discovered as a result of the recent sequencing of nearly all the DNA in the nucleus of the human cell.
Several techniques that do not involve microarrays can reveal the jobs performed by newly discovered genes (or, more properly, by the proteins those genes encode), but those approaches do not always work well or quickly.
In what has come to be called the guilt -by- association application, expression arrays can help fill in the blanks, even in the absence of any prior clues to a gene's role in the body.

This method derives from the awareness that no gene is an island.
If genes in a tissue switch on and off together in response to some influence-say, a drug, an infection or an induced gene mutation-workers can surmise that those like-acting genes operate in the same regulatory pathway; that is, the genes work together or in series to induce a cellular response.
Investigators can reasonably guess, then, that the jobs of any originally mysterious genes in the group resemble those of genes whose responsibilities are already understood.

Drug Discovery Tools

Drug researchers, too, take advantage of the guilt-by-association method-to discover proteins not previously known to operate in biological pathways involved in diseases.
Once those proteins are found, they can be enlisted as targets for the development of new and better medicines.

In one example, Peter S. Linsley, our colleague at Rosetta Inpharmatics, wanted to identify fresh targets for drugs that might combat inflammatory illnesses, in which the immune system perversely damages parts of the body.
He therefore asked which genes in white blood cells of the immune system increase and decrease their protein production in parallel with the gene for a protein called interleukin-2 (IL-2), which is strongly implicated in inflammatory disorders.

He got the answer by producing expression profiles for white blood cells exposed to various chemicals and then having a computer run a sophisticated pattern-matching program to pinpoint a set of genes that consistently switched on or off when the IL-2 gene was activated.
This set included a gene whose function in the body had not been determined by other means. 
At about the same time, investigators at the Pasteur Institute in Paris independently confirmed, with other methods, that this gene operates in the IL-2 pathway.
Together the findings suggest that the protein encoded by the gene could be a good target for anti-inflammatory drugs.

Pharmaceutical scientists use expression profiling in a different way: to pick out-and eliminate-drug candidates that are likely to produce unacceptable side effects.
Workers who want to determine whether a given compound could damage the heart, for example, can compile a compendium of expression profiles for heart cells exposed to existing drugs and other chemicals. 
If they also treat heart cells with the drug candidate under study, they can ask a computer to compare the resulting signature with those in the compendium.
A signature matching those produced by substances already known to disrupt cardiac cells would raise a red flag.

A compendium of expression profiles can also help explain why a drug produces particular side effects.
A pressing question today, for instance, is why protease inhibitors, which are lifesavers to people infected with HIV (the virus that causes AIDS), can lead to high cholesterol and triglyceride levels in the blood, strange redistributions of body fat, and insulin resistance. 
Aware that the liver influences the production and breakdown of lipids (the group that includes cholesterol and triglycerides) and of lipid-containing proteins, we and others at Rosetta, in collaboration with Roger G. Ulrich and his team at Abbott Laboratories, decided to see whether one protease inhibitor-ritonavir-produced some of its side effects by acting on the liver.

With an array representing about 25,000 rat genes, we produced expression profiles of rat liver tissue exposed to an assortment of compounds that can be toxic to the liver.
After that, we grouped the compounds according to similarities of expression signatures across some 2,400 genes that responded strongly to those substances.
Next we delivered ritonavir to rat livers and compared the resulting expression profiles with those generated earlier.

Ritonavir, we learned, leads to activation of genes that are usually quieted in response to a well-known lipid-lowering agent; ritonavir also decreases the production of proteins that normally assemble into proteosomes, structures that break down no-longer-useful proteins, including lipid-containing types. 
These findings suggest that ritonavir raises lipid levels in the liver-and hence in the blood-in part by elevating the liver's synthesis of lipids and inhibiting its breakdown of lipid-containing proteins.
Further study of exactly how ritonavir interacts with (he lipid- and proteosome-producing pathways will provide ideas for reducing its side effects.

Treatment Tailors

Having an enlarged arsenal of drugs, and more drugs with fewer side effects, would be a great outcome of the molecular profiling made possible by DNA array studies.
But many physicians are hoping for an even better result: rapid diagnostic tools that would divide patients with similar symptoms into separate groups that would benefit from different treatment plans.
As the lymphoma study mentioned at the start of this article demonstrated, cancer specialists in particular desperately need ways to identify patients who require maximally aggressive treatment from the beginning.

Research into breast cancer by our group at Rosetta, working with collaborators from the Netherlands Cancer Institute in Amsterdam, demonstrates how expression arrays can help [see box on page 49].
In this case, we wanted to invent a test able to determine which young patients with early-stage breast cancer (with no evidence of cancer in the lymph nodes) need systemic drug therapy to prevent tumor spread (metastasis) after surgery and which do not.
Although current guidelines recommend systemic treatment for about 90 percent of these women, a good many of them would probably avoid distant metastases even if they did not have such treatment.
Unfortunately, standard tools cannot single out the women at greatest risk.

We began by generating expression profiles for tumors from close to 100 women under age 55 whose clinical course had been followed for more than five years after surgery.
We initially worked with a microarray representing 25,000 human genes.
In the end, we found that one particular signature produced by about 70 genes strongly indicated that metastases would soon appear.
In addition, the opposite pattern was strongly indicative of a good prognosis.
Clearly, some tumors are programmed to metastasize before they grow to a size smaller than half a dime, whereas other, larger masses are programmed not to spread.

Our results have to be confirmed by others before expression profiling can become a routine part of breast cancer workups. 
Within two years, many medical centers will probably begin to test expression profiling as a guide to therapy, not just for breast cancer but for other types as well.
Other diseases need improved diagnostic tools, too.
Expression profiling might help distinguish subgroups of patients with such disorders as asthma, diabetes or obesity who have special treatment needs.
Those applications are now under study.

Before microarrays can live up to their full potential as research and diagnostic tools, several roadblocks have to be toppled.
The chips, scanners and other accoutrements remain expensive (engendering "array envy" in many underfunded academics).
Presumably, however, costs will drop with time.

Yet even if prices fall, the technologies may prove infeasible, at least initially, for doctors' offices or standard medical laboratories.
Few physicians or technicians have the equipment and the skill to prepare tissue samples properly for use with arrays.
What is more, to diagnose, say, liver disease based on changes in gene expression in liver cells, a doctor would ideally need to obtain tissue from the liver.
But that organ is not readily accessible.

These problems loom large right now but are probably surmountable with ingenuity.
At times, for instance, accessible tissues might function as acceptable stand-ins for inaccessible ones. 
Moreover, in some instances, microarrays themselves may not have to be used;
they might provide the research information needed for devising new diagnostic tests, which can then take other forms.

As the operations of cells and the entire body become better understood, physicians will be able to make more precise diagnoses, to offer patients more sophisticated therapies (possibly including gene therapies), and to tailor these interventions to an individual's genetic background and current state of physiological functioning. 
By the year 2020, health maintenance organizations and their ilk could conceivably keep in silico models of the personal molecular states of their subscribers-virtual simulations that could be updated constantly with microarray and other data from doctor visits and with new scientific information about cell biology.
Perhaps some subscribers won't like that idea and will forgo a rate discount-and quite possibly the best care-in return for a feeling of privacy.
Those who go along with the program, though, will probably delay the effects of aging more successfully and lead healthier lives.
