
STICKY ENDS AND A NEW CREATION

James Watson in his book Recombinant DNA-A Short Course recalls that in 1966 despite the fact that the genetic code had been fully deciphered molecular biology appeared to some to be at an impasse.
Unless some radically new methods emerged to enable scientists to isolate and study individual genes, there appeared to be little prospect of further dramatic advances.
According to Watson to avoid «marking time» several eminent researchers actually left molecular genetics for neurobiology.
He was undoubtedly referring to, among others, Francis Crick, who moved on to the field of developmental biology and to the study of the brain.

Crick felt that the foundations of molecular biology had been well established and there remained the lengthy task of «filling in the many details.» He did not and could not have foreseen that a veritable avalanche of discoveries would soon sweep through the scientific community and begin a period of excitement and achievement that has had few parallels in the history of biological research.

As has been true of so many other advances in the life sciences, these dramatic breakthroughs arose not as the result of a major organized research program with assigned responsibilities but out of the voluntary study in independent laboratories of seemingly innocuous, and to the nonscientist, perhaps rather insignificant creatures.
Some critics, in fact, find fault with the Human Genome Project on the grounds that it is too goal-oriented and might distract individuals and funding from other vital less-showy areas-but more of that discussion later.

The history of science is a rich mosaic of individual lines of inquiry often with no apparent end beyond knowledge of and for itself.
Certainly, trends are followed and one conclusion may often advance the search for yet another.
Isolated observations, speculations, and seemingly unrelated data may often as not fade into obscurity.
They may, however, resurface at precisely the moment needed to further an area perhaps never envisioned by the original investigators.
Such was the case once again in molecular biology during the late 1960s as disparate discoveries converged and the brief sense of stasis passed quickly into the realization of unprecedented opportunity. 

You will recall our recounting of the discovery of viruses including the bacteriophages, or «phages,» the viruses that attack bacteria.
The most intensively studied of these had been the phages which infect Escherichia coli , more conveniently called E. coli .
This humble bacterium first isolated from the feces of an infant in 1888 by Dr. Theodore Escherich, might seem to lack the panache to become a famous player in the drama of genetic history.
In fact, with the exception of the human organism, this blunt, rod-shaped cell, less than 1 micrometer (39 millionths of an inch) in length, has been studied more intensively than any other living organism.
E. coli is our constant companion.
It lives in the hundreds of billions in our large intestines in the company of 400 or so other bacterial species.
These bacteria are a threat to us only because of the possibility of a life-threatening infection resulting from trauma, puncture of the intestine and release of its contents into the normally sterile abdominal cavity. 
The important function of these bacteria is to protect against the invasion of disease-causing organisms into the intestinal contents.
Such interlopers are routinely overwhelmed by these «friendly» bacteria.

The bacteriophages designated T-even phages are viruses containing DNA that infect E. Coli .
Remember that viruses are not living organisms, but rather are nucleic acids, either DNA or RNA, wrapped in protein. 

They can propagate themselves only by entering a living cell and utilizing the cellular metabolism to make copies of themselves.
They are strange, lifeless parasites which pass from cell to cell, eventually perishing, if one may use that term, if they cannot find and enter a cell and force the cell to do their bidding.
Rendering cells inhospitable to harmful viruses is the rationale behind many vaccines.

A dramatic example is that of the smallpox virus vaccine. 
As the result of a worldwide effort to eradicate smallpox, a viral disease that over the centuries has killed and disfigured millions, the World Health Organization mounted a massive effort to identify and vaccinate all persons in contact with every known smallpox patient.
Humans are the only known host for this virus.
In October 1975 the last case of smallpox in the world was reported.
The virus could no longer find cells without adequate defense mechanisms and the scourge of smallpox disappeared from the planet.
The isolation of genes during the Human Genome Project is expected to result in the development of many vaccines otherwise unattainable by conventional methods, to stamp out other pernicious viruses.

Figure 1

The two sides of the double helix are alternating sugar (S) and phosphate (P) groups joined to each other

The sides are held together by hydrogen bonds between pairs of nitrogenous bases (A-T or G-C) which are bonded to the sugars.

Figure 2

A nucleotide consists of a phosphate, a deoxyribose sugar and one of four possible nitrogenous bases (A., C, G, or T)

One of the latter attaches to the 1' carbon of the sugar In DNA, adjacent nucleotides are joined by the phosphate between the 5' carbon atom of the sugar of one nucleotide and the 3' carbon atom of the sugar in the adjoining nucleotide. 
In DNA, one side of the double helix terminates in a 3' end while the other side, aligned in the opposite direction (antiparallel), terminates in a 5' end.

By the mid-1960s the rapid breakdown of DNA as well as RNA in solutions made by grinding up of cells in the laboratory was a familiar phenomenon.
The destruction of these nucleic acids was traced to «nucleases,» enzymes which had been found to exist in many types of cells.
These enzymes cleaved the nucleic acids into many random fragments.
However, the means by which a cell might rejoin DNA fragments was unknown.
Then, in 1967 an enzyme was found which could do just that.
Amazingly, this enzyme, DNA ligase, was discovered almost simultaneously by five research groups working independently in separate laboratories.

Before we proceed, it will be useful to review and elaborate on a few details of DNA structure that needs to be clearly understood. 
Let us visualize the DNA double helix simply as a ladder. 
A ladder has two sidepieces and rungs.
The rungs in this analogy are two joined sections, each a complementary pair of nitrogenous bases, either AT or GC.
The sidepieces are the deoxyribose sugar (S) and phosphate (P) «backbones» of the helix: they are a continuous strand of S-P-S-P-S-P, and so on.

According to chemical protocol, the five carbons of the deoxyribose sugar are numbered to distinguish one from another. 
In this scheme, they are listed as carbon atoms 1' to 5'.
The 5' carbon atom projects from the rest of the ring-shaped sugar molecule.
A hydroxyl group (OH) is connected to the 3' carbon.

To continue the ladder analogy, one can say that the left sidepiece runs from top to bottom and the right sidepiece from the bottom to the top.
The result is that the left sidepiece ends at the top with a phosphate group projecting from the 5' carbon atom, and at the bottom with a hydroxyl group projecting from the 3' carbon atom.
The right sidepiece is just the opposite.
The practical consequences for the molecule are that this orientation allows it to maintain its symmetrical double helix shape and function normally.
Bear this structure in mind as we continue with our history.

In 1970, a group working in the laboratory of Har Gobind Khorana, then at the University of Wisconsin, found that an enzyme DNA ligase made by E.,coli could randomly stitch together end to end completely separated DNA pieces.
The reaction was inefficient, since it depended on ends of the strands coming in direct contact with each other. 
In order to render the process more efficient, a way would be needed to hold the two ends together so the ligase could act.

Such a method was quickly devised at Stanford in both the laboratory of Peter Lobban and A.,Dale Kaiser as well as that of David Jackson, Robert Simons, and Paul Berg.
The former group used DNA ligase to join pieces of cut-up bacteriophage DNA.
The latter scientists used the new technique to join bacteriophage DNA to DNA from an animal virus.

This procedure involved the following basic stops.
The DNA was first treated with an enzyme made by the bacterial phage «lambda.» The enzyme was an «exonuclease,» so called because it functions by cutting nucleotides off at the end of a DNA molecule.
It cuts back only the 5' end of the nucleotide and as a result leaves a projecting single-stranded 3' end at each end of the linear DNA molecule.
To these projecting 3' ends, a short series of identical nucleotides containing adenine were attached through the activity of another enzyme. 
Another hatch of DNA was treated in a likewise manner, except that nucleotides containing thymine were added instead of adenine.

When these two samples of DNA were mixed, the complementary «tails» of A- and T-bearing nucleotides became joined by hydrogen bonding.
This combined the once separate fragments into long, interconnected chains.
DNA ligase was then added to form bonds between the sugar and phosphate groups.
The two DNA strands were now one.

It was certainly intriguing that one could now cut up DNA into unpredictable heterogeneous fragments and randomly stitch them back together.
However, for further insights into the organization of DNA and its genes-that is, the determination of precise nucleotide sequences- very specific nucleases would have to be found.
The prevailing opinion was that such specific DNA-cutting capability did not exist in nature.

The only clue to the possibility that more specific nucleases might exist came from observations beginning as early as 1953 that when DNA molecules from E.,coli were introduced into another slightly different form of E., coli they seldom functioned genetically.
They were quickly broken down into smaller fragments.
This apparently was part of a system that had evolved in bacteria to protect them against the entrance of foreign DNA.
In addition to all of the other more obvious forms of competition in nature, there is a constant invisible struggle played out in the microscopic world, in this case between bacteria and bacteriophages.

Darwin's natural selection is recreated here on a minute scale.

All organisms have developed some form of defense, including the simple expedient of growing rapidly.
This will ensure that some will survive by the sheer weight of their numbers in spite of constant attack by predators.
Bacteria are prime examples of this.
In addition to their remarkable capacity to multiply rapidly, which in some species allows a population to double in size every 20 minutes, they produce enzymes which destroy incoming DNA from phage infection or from DNA picked up by other means.

These enzymes had been found by a series of investigators in a number of laboratories in the mid- and late-1960s.
They named them «restriction endonucleases,» or simply «restriction enzymes,» since they cut up or «restricted» nucleic acids and were produced inside the cell.
In 1970, Hamilton Smith of Johns Hopkins University followed up on his accidental discovery that the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae rapidly broke down phage DNA but would not harm its own genome.
Study of cell-free extracts of this organism showed that the DNA degradation was caused by a restriction enzyme, which he and his colleagues isolated and named Hind 11.
This was the first in what would come to be known as a series of Type II enzymes.
Their use would revolutionize molecular biology.

Hind II was significantly different from the other restriction enzymes isolated earlier in that it was «site specific.» That means that it had the very important characteristic of being able to recognize a specific nitrogenous base sequence and cut DNA apart at that site only.

Even more extraordinary was EcoR I enzyme isolated soon afterward by Robert Yoshimori in Herbert Boyer's laboratory at the University of California School of Medicine at San Francisco. 
This enzyme induced breaks that were separated by several nucleotides.
Each cut is always toward the 5' C end of a strand.

This enzyme cut the DNA only between G and A on the opposite sides of the helix.
The helix broke apart at that point, leaving two ends with projecting complementary nucleotide sequences. 
These are known as «sticky ends» because the complementary sequences could easily stick together again by forming hydrogen bonds.

In November 1972, Janet Mertz and Ronald W., Davis of Stanford reported that viral DNA cleaved by EcoR I would rejoin first by hydrogen bonding and could be permanently held together by treatment with DNA ligase.
The possibilities were staggering. 
Using this approach, could DNA from an organism be cut up and spliced to the DNA of another organism ?

In other words, could the natural barriers that prevent the exchange of genetic information between unrelated organisms be breached?
These barriers have been built up over millions of years of evolution.
Species are identified and determined by the genes that they carry.
In organisms that breed sexually, species are literally defined by the ability of their members to breed with one another.
This persistence of genetic uniqueness, rather than the chaos that would otherwise result, extends throughout the living world.
Could this be overcome?

The answer was yes.
The first stop toward this was taken in 1973.

A., C., Y., Chang and Stanley Cohen at the Stanford University School of Medicine and Herbert Boyer and Robert Helling at the University of California School of Medicine at San Francisco reported the joining of biologically functional DNA molecules from two different organisms.

They called their composite molecule a DNA «chimera» because of its conceptual similarity to the mythological Chimera, a creature with the head of a lion, the body of a goat, and the tail of a serpent.

In this pioneering experiment, DNA fragments from E. coli were combined and inserted into other E. coli cells, whereupon the hybrid DNA functioned normally.
Their chimeric DNA came to be known as recombinant DNA, or rDNA, and the process of cleavage, fusion, and replication of the chimera as «genetic engineering.» Note that in this first rDNA experiment, the DNA was not exchanged between species but from one E. coli to another.

Using the procedures from their first success, the research group immediately went on to splice DNA from the dangerous bacterium Staphylococcus into E.,coli .
Given these successes, the question naturally arose-could animal genes also be introduced into bacteria and would they replicate and function there?
They soon had the answer. 
Using DNA from a toad, they spliced a toad gene segment into E., coli DNA and put the newly made DNA into cells of the E., coli bacterium.

Mythology had come to life.
An animal-bacterial chimera had been created in the laboratory.
The natural barriers between living kingdoms had been overcome.

Figure 3

The enzyme Hind II cuts completely across the DNA double helix at a specific site

Figure 4

EcoR I cuts between G and A on opposite sides of DNA double helix

Figure 5

The «sticky ends» are exposed nitrogenous bases

Embodied in these three extraordinary experiments, simple in principle and introduced above in bare summary form, are the fundamental methods of the Human Genome Project.
We must expand on these now in this context to promote a clear understanding of these procedures.

We have already explained the action of restriction enzymes. 
Since The properties of the original Hind II enzyme had been described and demonstrated by Huntington Smith in 1970, several hundred forms of these enzymes have been isolated and purified, each with its own specific sites of cleavage on the DNA molecule.
These enzymes recognize a sequence of four to six nucleotides and most form a staggered cut on opposite sides of the double helix as in the case of EcoR I.
Thus they leave sticky ends of unmatched nitrogenous bases.
Now, 20 years later, one can simply peruse a molecular biology supply catalog, pick up a phone, and order any one of these enzymes. 

Since the bases in the double helical DNA are complementary, the staggered pattern of cutting means, as we have pointed out, that half of the sticky ends are complementary to the other half. 
Therefore, theoretically, DNA from any other source-plant, animal, bacteria, and so on-cut with the same restriction enzyme will have these same complementary projecting sticky ends.
When the two DNA samples are mixed under the proper conditions with DNA ligase added, the complementary bases will join by hydrogen bonding and the ligase will complete the repair of the helical backbones.
In such a mixture, DNA from one source may fuse to DNA from the same source, or with the foreign DNA.

The peculiar names of the restriction enzymes are derived in the following manner.
The first three letters are taken from the Latin names of the bacterium from which they are isolated. 
The genus provides the first letter and the species the next two.
Haemophilus influenzae becomes Hin and Escherichia coli becomes Eco.
Sometimes a designation is included to indicate a specific form (strain) of a bacterium such as Haemophilus strain Rd in Hind or E. coli strain RY13, in EcoR.
Often, more than one restriction enzyme is produced by one organism and each is numbered as it is isolated, as in Hind II or EcoR I.
Cutting and joining double-stranded molecules of DNA with enzymes was possible by 1972.
But in order to do more than simply exist in a test tube as curiosities, these chimeras had to be placed within a DNA molecule that could replicate and function in a particular cell.
The cell of choice has been the bacterial cell, for several reasons.

First, bacteria can be grown under controlled conditions, rapidly and in enormous numbers.
Overnight, a few cells will multiply into literally billions.
It is very important to understand that a bacterial cell ordinarily reproduces simply by copying itself.
Assuming that no mutations occur in the cells, all the descendants of that one cell are identical. 
Such a population of cells originating from a single cell is termed a «clone» and the process of producing that clone is referred to as «cloning» the cell. 

The DNA in a typical bacterial cell exists in two forms. 
One is the single bacterial chromosome which, unlike the chromosomes in our cells, is in the form of a circular molecule. 
The DNA of all other organisms can he likened to a long string.
In bacteria, the ends of the string are joined, forming a circle.
In addition to the DNA in the bacterial chromosome, DNA also occurs in bacteria in the form of plasmids. 

These, like the bacterial chromosome. are also circular DNA molecules, but much smaller.
When the bacterial cell divides, the bacterial chromosome replicates and one chromosome is passed on to the new cell.

Likewise, each of the plasmids replicate and halt are delivered to the next generation.
The plasmids are unique, independent, selt-replicating DNA molecules which can exist only within the living bacterial cell.

Plasmid numbers average about 30 per cell and specific types of bacteria may have one per cell, others as many as several hundred.
E. coli has 4.5 million nuclectide pairs in its chromosome while its plasmids may have only a few thousand.
The human genome consists of 4 billion nucleotide pairs.

Plasmids can easily be isolated from bacteria by breaking open the cells with enzymes which break down the cell wall.
The resulting mix is centrifuged.
The heavier chromosomal DNA, termed «genomic» DNA, as well as cell fragments will go to the bottom.
This leaves a relatively clean suspension of plasmids near the top of the centrifuge tube.

These tiny circles of DNA are actually not vital to the survival of the bacterium.
The plasmids can he removed from a bacterial cell and the cell will function normally.
However, some plasmids do contain genes which confer a marked advantage to the cell under certain conditions.
For example, the fatal poison of «lockjaw» is a product of genes in plasmids of the tetanus bacterium.
E. coli has plasmids that cause one form of the infamous «traveler's diarrhoea.
Probably the most widely studied plasmid genes are the ones conferring resistance to specific antibiotics.
Certain bacteria can produce enzymes coded for by plasmid genes that break down antibiotics such as penicillin, ampicillin, tetracycline, or chloramphenicol.
In nature, this gives the bacteria a defense mechanism against naturally occurring antibiotics.
In the tissues of an infected patient, bacteria with these plasmids may overcome the administration of therapeutic antibiotics.

Such resistant infections have become a major medical problem. 

This seemingly esoteric description of bacterial life contains another key element in our story.
These bacterial plasmids are used as the DNA molecules into which other DNA fragments cut out by a restriction enzyme can be placed.
Going back to our original principle, if we cut up any DNA with a restriction enzyme and cut plasmids with the same enzyme, mix the cut plasmids and the cut DNA in the presence of ONA ligase. plasmid-foreign DNA chimeras will be formed.

These chimeric plasmids, placed into receptive bacteria, will «live,» that is, they will replicate and produce whatever gene products their constituent genes may code for. 
If the foreign DNA in the hybrid plasmid carries the proper code for protein x, then protein x will be produced.
This amazing phenomenon demonstrates the remarkable unity of all living systems.
Bacteria, ancient primitive organisms, have much the same cellular biochemistry as frogs, mice,trees, or humans.

Given the almost universal code of genetic instructions, spelled out as nitrogenous base sequences, the bacterial cell, under the proper conditions, will assist in making a human protein as readily as a bacterial product.

Let us look once again at the very first recombinant DNA experiment done by Cohen and his co-workers h1 light of this more specific background.
In SO doing. we will explain the various steps necessary to carry out this deceptively simple experiment.
Please keep in mind that the methods used in this now-classical experiment are indispensable tools in the mapping and sequencing of the human genome.

At Stanford University, Stanley Cohen had already isolated a wide variety of plasmids.
One of them, pSC101, had the genetic information necessary to replicate in E. coli and to confer resistance to the antibiotic tetracycline.

One of the privileges of isolating plasmids is that one is allowed to name them.
Plasmid pSC101 was the one hundred first (101) plasmid (p) isolated by Stanley Coben (SC).
Small though plasmids may be, their isolation and utilization may sometimes bring great rewards.
Stanley Cohen shared the Nobel prize with Herbert Boyer and Paul Berg for their revolutionary recombinant DNA experiments.

Cohen and his co-workers had found that when they subjected the pSC101 plasmid to cleavage by EcoR I, it was cut in only one place, thus transforming the circular plasmid into a linear form.
They reformed the plasmids into circles by joining the ends through the action of DNA ligase.

They put them back into E. coli where the plasmids replicated as usual and thus were passed on to all the succeeding generations of those E. coli .

They were able to get the plasmids into the bacterial cells by the process of transformation.
You will recall the original description by Fred Griffith of bacterial transformation back in 1928.
In his experiment, DNA fragments from dead Streptococcus cells entered live cells and conferred on them the capacity to produce protective capsules.
Such transformation occurs occasionally in nature in a few kinds of bacteria, among them Streptococcus of «strep-throat» fame.

In 1970, Morton Mandel and A. Higa at the University of Hawaii School of Medicine found that treatment of E. coli with calcium somehow enabled the bacteria to take up DNA extracted from viruses.
In this receptive state the bacterial cells are referred to as «competent,» which means that the DNA in the solution surrounding the cells will be absorbed through the wall and mingle with the cells' contents.
E. coliis not naturally capable of transformation, but Cohen's group utilized this calcium technique and were able to introduce plasmids into E. coli .
In this process, E. coli is first incubated SO that it becomes a dense, rapidly growing population of healthy cells.
The cells are spun down and resuspended in calcium chloride and then mixed with the DNA sample.

After being subjected to incubation at several different temperatures, the cells are spread out onto a solid growth medium suitable for E. coli , but that also contains tetracycline at a concentration that would ordinarily kill the cells.
Those bacterial cells that have picked up one or more plasmids that confer antibiotic resistance will survive and multiply.

Since bacteria multiply so rapidly, alter overnight incubation individual clusters, each containing millions of cells, will be seen on the surface of the medium.
These can be removed and put into a fresh growth medium to increase their numbers even further.

Essential to this procedure is that when bacteria are spread out on such á growth medium, each cell capable of growing will reproduce.
As each cell resulting from successive reproductions heaps up upon its ancestors, they form a population of millions of cells which appear as a small spot on the solid medium surface.

This spot is a «colony» and a colony is a clone, a population of cells derived from one cell.
All of the cells in this clone are identical, in theory at least, so that removing a colony and growing it in a flask or tube can supply one with a vast population of cells with the same genome.

Bacterial transformation actually occurs in only about one cell in a million during this laboratory procedure.
However, using this technique, those few cells and their descendants in the form of colonies can be easily selected and readily propagated into as many cells as are needed for a particular purpose.

Stanley Cohen and his colleagues placed pSC101 plasmids into E. coli by transformation and the colonies of resistant cells were removed from tetracycline-containing solid medium.
The next step was to see if a piece of foreign DNA could be inserted into the plasmids.
EcoR I was used to cut open the DNA of another E. coli plasmid, this one carrying resistance to the antibiotic kanamycin.
Then they mixed these plasmids with the pSC101 plasmids, also in linear form, and the sticky ends joined.

The new plasmid hybrids were put into E. coli .
Some of the bacteria survived on plates containing media with both tetracycline and Kanamycin, a combination that ordinarily would have been lethal.

The plasmids that had resulted from their mixture were chimeras of pSC101 and a second DNA fragment from the other plasmid type that carried in its genes the information for producing resistance to Kanamycin.
This demonstrated, very importantly, that the pSC101 plasmid could serve as a carrier for introducing another DNA segment into E. coli .

Many other such carriers have been developed since this first example.

Such carriers are termed «vectors.» Was it possible that genes from another bacterial species could be combined with a carrier by such methods?
Perhaps such bacterial DNA, being foreign to E. coli , would have genes which would not be able to function in such cells.
Plasmid pl258, extracted from Staphylococcus aureus , conveyed resistance to yet another antibiotic, penicillin.

This plasmid was cleaved with EcoR I and combined as above with pSC101.

This new hybrid transformed E. coli into cells that were now tetracycline-and penicillin-resistant. 

Finally, in this exciting series of experiments, the question was asked, «Could even animal cell genes be implanted in the bacteria, and would they function there?
» Selecting a toad DNA fragment, they fused to pSC101 and introduced the combination into E. coli .
They then selected transformed colonies by their survival in a medium containing tetracycline.
Since the new gene could not itself be conveniently selected out, the pSC101, with its tetracycline-resistant gene, was an effective vector for carrying it into the E. coli and also for selection.

The actual product produced by the activity of the new toad gene product was RNA, which ordinarily would be used to make a part of the toad cell's ribosome.
In this case the E. coli reacted to the introduction of the newly created plasmid by obediently pumping out toad ribosomal RNA.
The first animal-bacterial hybrid had been created.

Figure 6

The DNA fragments will join to the cut plasmids by «sticky ends» made by restriction enzymes

Placed back into bacteria, the new genes in the plasmids may be able to function as they would normally in the cells from which they come

SEND IN THE CLONES

Chromosomes, seen through a microscope lens, offer little information to the viewer.
The individual genes which make up the chromosomes are still invisible, just as a view of the earth from space reveals the continents, but none of the inhabitants.
The precise location of the genes is thus hidden somewhere on those inert rods, scattered, stained, and fixed on the glass slide.
We must leave behind the world of vision to find the genes.

At one level of analysis we might succeed in tracking them down to their neighborhood-a specific one of the 46 human chromosomes. 
This kind of basic «mapping» has already been done for almost 5000 genes.

Searching even further, we might come upon the specific block in the neighborhood where they reside.
The block will be crowded, but it will be, in biological terms, a chromosomal site that is accurate to within one million nitrogenous base pairs of its actual location on a particular chromosome.
Relatively few genes as yet belong in this category.

Even more difficult to attain would be the ultimate goal of knowing the exact location of every gene-its home address. 
To accomplish that One would need to «sequence» the entire human genome, that is, to determine the nitrogenous base sequence of all of the nucleotides in human DNA.
Yet that is precisely what the Human Genome Project proposes to do.

The results of such an analysis would be a string of 3 billion letters, A, T, G, or C, each representing the nitrogenous base of a nucleotide.
A printout of simply the letters would fill 200 volumes the size of the Manhattan telephone book. 
Within that enormous list would be the sequence for every human gene as well as the sequence of great lengths of DNA with no currently known function.

Even the possession of such a sequence would be only the beginning.

Knowing the sequence would not of itself tell us the location of all of our genes.
Scientists would still want to know more.
They want to find out not only the position but also the function of each gene and how that function is regulated and controlled.

For example, how do muscle cells, liver cells, or brain cells perform their individual and highly specialized functions using this same set of genes?
Which genes become active or cease activity in these cells and how is that accomplished? 
Further, how does the myriad of cell types in the body untold from only the fertilized human egg and its 46 chromosomes, half of which have been contributed by the mother and the other half by the father?

The simplest form of mapping is done by the more classical methods of analysis of the inheritance of visible characteristics in family histories.

More detailed mapping and sequencing such as is being done in the Human Genome Project as well as related functional and developmental questions need and utilize the tools of molecular biology that we have introduced in the previous chapter.

In early 1990, the Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health published the specific aims of the Human Genome Project with emphasis on the first five years extending from fiscal year 1991 to 1995.

The publication spells out the scientific goals as well as the administrative framework proposed to assist in meeting them.
Underlying all of the objectives is the absolute requirement for a supply of individual genes and groups of genes for detailed analysis.

Suppose that a geneticist working in 1970 had wanted to investigate the structure and function of the human genes governing the synthesis of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule which gives color to our red blood cells.
She might want to know the nitrogenous base sequence of those genes or perhaps determine what changes occur in the genes to cause the genetic disease thalassemia, in which one of the four polypeptides making up the hemoglobin molecule is not produced at all The question could not be answered unless enough of the gene could be provided to study it in detail-probably about a milligram, which amounts to about one forty-thousandths of an ounce.
That sounds like a trifling amount but it becomes monumental when one considers purifying it from whole human DNA.
The DNA involved in one hemoglobin gene is less than one part-per-million in the human genome.
One would therefore need an unattainable amount of DNA as a starting material.
If we assume that one could gather such a mass of human DNA, an even more difficult problem looms-how to separate the gene of interest from all the rest of the DNA?

Gene cloning now solves these problems.
To clone a gene means simply to obtain a minute, pure sample of the gene and make lots more of it, as if one had a document and made many identical ones by photocopying it.

The «photocopying» of genes is accomplished by first joining a few of the genes to vectors such as plasmids and inserting the vectors, now carrying the gene, into bacteria or other suitable cells.

We have introduced the basic principles of gene cloning already.
In that process, so-called foreign DNA, the DNA we have removed from an organism, is inserted into the vector molecule, such as a plasmid, to create a DNA chimera.
The building of such composites or artificial recombinant molecules has also been termed genetic engineering or «gene manipulation.» This procedure has also been referred to as «molecular cloning» or «gene cloning» because a population of genetically identical bacteria, all containing the desired DNA, can be grown in great numbers, thereby copying the DNA as often as the cells divide.

What is very significant is that these chimeras within the bacterial cells may be able to copy not only themselves but actually produce a specific gene product in large amounts.
This approach has already been utilized in the commercial production of human insulin, growth hormone, and the antiviral protein interferon. 
All of these can now be made by bacteria, because the human genes that regulate their synthesis have been isolated and cloned in bacteria.
The bacterial cells, grown in vast numbers, obedient to the commands of their genes, now make a human gene product.
Human gene products derived from genes isolated and cloned during the Human Genome Project will undoubtedly also he used for the benefit of humanity, particularly in the cure and prevention of disease.

However, our concern here is to examine the process of gene cloning enough to form a basis for a clear understanding of its essential use in realizing the goals of mapping and sequencing the human genome.

Let us first look at the arrangement of DNA within the chromosome as well as introduce the concept of how DNA function is regulated in the living cell.
Living cells are of two fundamental types, procaryotic and eucaryotic.
Procaryotic cells are bacteria while eucaryotic cells encompass all other cell types found in living organisms.

A major distinction between these two categories is that the bacteria do not have a membrane separating the chromosome DNA from the rest of the cell contents as do the eucaryotes. 
In other words, bacterial cells do not have a nucleus. 
Also, bacteria have about one-thousandth as much DNA as the typical eucaryotic cell.
DNA in eucaryotic cells is a long thin double helix within the cell nucleus.
In contrast, bacterial DNA is simply concentrated in a central region of the cell.

This bacterial genome is a single chromosome, a double helix in the form of a ring like a DNA snake with its tail in its mouth.
It has very little protein associated with it, in contrast to the human genome in which protein makes up a significant part of the chromosome.
Bacterial cells also may house smaller DNA rings, the plasmids, which are independent from the chromosome in replication and function.
The basic pattern of replication of DNA and the translation of genetic messages into proteins are m many respects the same for both pro- and eucaryotes but important differences remain.

The understanding of these differences is particularly significant in gene cloning.
Remember, in this procedure, we are often placing eucaryotic genes into a bacterial cell. 
The survival and function of those introduced genes depends upon the control of certain parameters which reflect these pro/eucaryotic differences.

When human chromosomes are observed through the microscope they look like bent, dark rods.
Typically, chromosomes are examined after they have been preserved in alcohol, stained with dyes, and spread out on a glass microscope slide.
Moreover, in order to be seen clearly these chromosomes must be caught in the act of cell division (mitosis).

Only in this brief period in the life of the cell do the chromosomes normally elongated and nearly invisible in the nondividing cell, coil and condense into typical blunt shapes.

Each of the 23 chromosome pairs assumes a unique shape in this process, so that one can prepare a «karyotype» of human chromosomes.

This evolves from photographing the chromosomes from a dividing cell and arranging them in 23 separate pairs in order of their size and shape.

This is a valuable aid in the diagnosis of such disorders as a missing or partial chromosome.
Obviously, the presence of two X chromosomes or an X and a Y determines the individual as a female or male and leads to a routine method for a prenatal diagnosis of sex.

Human chromosomes are about 60% protein and 40% DNA.
Some RNA is also present because of the occurrence of messenger RNA synthesis.
As noted earlier, the DNA of the chromosome exists as one long, unbroken double-helix strand.
A typical human chromosome contains about 140 million nucleotide pairs. 
Stretched out, the chromosome would be about 2 inches long.
Obviously an enormous amount of coiling is necessary to fit 46 chromosomes into the cell's small nucleus.

If we could gently uncoil a human chromosome' we would find that it would resemble beads on a string, with the string being the DNA and the beads the proteins.
Every 200 nucleotides the DNA helix is wrapped around a complex of «histones» which are small polypeptides.
These proteins are positively charged and the DNA is negatively charged and is thus strongly attracted to the protein cluster.
Further coiling of the DNA occurs as the string of DNA and histones wraps up into «supercoils.» This condensation is necessary 50 that the chromosome can pass intact from one cell to the next as cell division proceeds.
The actual doubling of the DNA molecule occurs when it is in the partly uncoiled state.
As the chromosomes condense to small thick rods by coiling, they have already replicated and appear as joined pairs, each chromosome still bound to the new replicate at a region termed the centromere.

In terms of function, we need to make a few distinctions beyond the generality that the chromosome is a DNA molecule made of genes that directs the synthesis of polypeptides.
To add to the complexity of analysis of human and other eucariotic DNA, approximately 10 to 25% of the total DNA is made up of short sequences typically five to ten nucleotides long that are repeated in tandem thousands of times.
In the chromosomes these tandem repeats are located at the centromeres where the two chromosomes remain attached after replication until they separate as the cell divides.
Apparently, this area of DNA serves a structural rather than a genetic role in the cell and somehow operates during replication and separation.

We have already described how, after the initial concerns about the safety of recombinant DNA had abated and researchers began to use safe vectors to study the structure of chromosomes in earnest in 1977, a surprising discovery was made.
Patterns of restriction-enzyme-produced fragments of eucaryotic chromosomal DNA revealed that there were regions scattered within the genes that were not part of the gene at all.

They were sequences of nucleotides which appeared to have no function whatsoever.
In contrast, a bacterial gene is simple.
It is uninterrupted so that the code of the gene can be directly interpreted from the amino acid sequence of the polypeptide whose synthesis it directs.

No one had assumed eucaryotes would be any different, but they are.
Eucaryotic genes are often arranged in pieces, separated by so-called «nonsense» codes.
Walter Gilbert of Harvard University termed these intervening sequences «introns» and the sequence of the actual gene codes as «exons.» Try adding a few dozen extra digits at random here and there within your telephone number.
Your number would be the exons, and all the rest would be the introns. 

Some genes have no introns, others have many.
No one knows for sure why we have introns.
Curiously, for reasons yet unknown, the human gene in which the most introns have been found to date is the gene whose failure causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
It has at least 60 to 100 introns. 
When, as the RNA prepares to carry the gene code information out of the nucleus, messenger RNA is synthesized along the length of an entire gene, the introns form parts of the RNA as well. 
Then the introns are enzymatically cut out in a process known as RNA splicing.

This leaves the messenger RNA with a reflection of the code of the gene and not the introns.

This phenomenon points out two problems associated with gene cloning.
One is that it is not possible to infer from the amino acid sequence in a protein the exact nitrogenous base sequence in that segment of the chromosome from which it was coded.
The introns will not be reflected in the amino acid sequence since they have been cut out of the message.
Also, one must manipulate the experimental conditions during cloning so that the bacteria are able to overcome the presence of introns in the DNA, since bacteria do not have introns in their chromosomes.

Moreover, how do cells, both procaryotic and eucaryotic, see to it that certain genes are active and others are not?
Cells must be able, at least, to «repress» genes, otherwise chaos would result.
All of our cells, except the sperm and eggs, have a complete set of our genes.
Eye cells have genes for kidney function, while heart cells have genes for hair color.
Cells have somehow evolved mechanisms to repress the genes coding for enzymes that are not needed at any one time and to activate the genes when they are needed.
The elucidation of these systems remains a major area of research in molecular biology.
Quite frankly, scientists as yet know very little about how such complex systems operate.
However we can relate a few known generalities relevant to this question.

François Jacob and Jacques Monod of the Institut Pasteur in Paris were the pioneers in the 1950s and 1960s in the study of these questions with their masterful Nobel-winning analysis of how E. coli makes enzymes that break apart lactose (milk sugar) molecules. 
The products of this breakdown are used as a source of nutrition by the bacteria.
Among other conclusions, they found that in order for messenger RNA to be synthesized at the gene, the enzyme RNA polymerase must bind to the DNA near the beginning of the gene at a region called the promoter.
The enzyme then quickly begins to put together the messenger RNA needed to synthesize the enzymes required to break down the lactose.

The eucaryotic cell has requirements for gene control of even greater complexity.
Not only must the genes be turned on or off to operate basic cell functions but these systems also must respond to signals from the cells' surroundings.
This is especially important in cells that are differentiating into various cell types.
A fertilized human egg becomes a baby, a creature made up of trillions of cells of many kinds. 
Somehow each developmental stage triggers the gene expression needed for the next stage.

In human cells with their 100,000 genes, at any one time only about 1% of the genome is actually expressing itself.
The other 99% is turned off by systems only now being uncovered through molecular biological techniques.
For our purposes, let us simply generalize that regulatory systems similar to those in bacteria are involved-but there are many additional complexities. 
Again, most questions surrounding this complicated area remain unanswered.

There are differences between the promoter sequences in bacteria and those in eucaryotes, which latter group includes humans.
The promoters for messenger RNA synthesis in the human genome are not necessarily recognized by bacteria.
In order to obtain expression of a human DNA sequence inserted into E. coli , for example, it may be necessary to position the human gene next to a bacterial promoter.

In addition, to achieve expression of eucaryotic DNA in bacteria, it is necessary to add a site on the recombinant DNA molecule allowing it to, bind to the bacterial ribosomes.
This binding site is not normally present in eucaryotic DNA. 
In summary, it is not sufficient to include only the human DNA genes in gene cloning, at least if one proposes to use them to express themselves in polypeptide synthesis.
A mosaic of accessories must be engineered to accompany the gene in question, which makes genetic engineering more complicated than it might seem at first.

If the scientist is interested only in obtaining large quantities of the gene rather than making a gene product, it is sufficient if the gene is simply copied in the vector.

Figure 1

A karyotype of a human male

Note the large X and the smaller Y sex chromosomes. 
Each chromosome appears double because the karyotype is made after the chromosomes have replicated before mitosis but have not yet separated.

Figure 2

A chromosome, in the stage when it can be seen with a microscope, is tightly coiled DNA molecule which is it coiled around clusters of protein molecules

Now, having seen some of the complexities that need to be dealt with, let's turn to some practical considerations in cloning human genes.
Any DNA cloning procedure has four basic parts:

1. a method for making DNA fragments
2. joining of these «foreign» DNA fragments to the vector
3. a means of introducing this recombinant into a host cell where it can replicate
4. a method for «screening» or selecting a clone of cells that have acquired the recombinant. We followed those steps in our recounting of the very first recombinant DNA experiments of the early 1970s.


Suppose we want to follow those basic stops in order to clone human genes.
Because of the size and complexity of the human genome, more sophisticated methods and strategies have been and continue to be developed for such a task.

There are two basic approaches to cloning a specific gene. 
They have to do with the starting material.
The first approach involves cloning all the DNA fragments from a DNA sample cut into pieces by restriction enzymes.
Then the pieces are put into bacteria, cloned, and the bacteria with the various DNA fragments are selected out, usually by their antibiotic resistance.
Then the clones with the actual gene one is interested in are selected by a means which we will explain shortly.
This practice of cloning all the random DNA fragments of a DNA sample is called «shotgunning.» For example, we might digest total human DNA with a restriction enzyme, insert each fragment or small groups of fragments into a suitable vector, clone, and then attempt to isolate the clones containing a specific gene.
This is roughly equivalent to passing the Sunday New York Times through a shredder, making a few million photocopies of each piece, mixing everything together, and looking for the pieces with the Mets' score.

Let us assume that the DNA fragments resulting from enzyme digestion were, on the average, about 1000 to 2000 base pairs long, or, to use the conventional term, I to 2 «kilobases»(kb) long.
Since human DNA contains approximately 3 billion base pairs , the concentration of any specific DNA fragment would be less than one in a million, making this a cumbersome approach to the problem.
There would be a Limited number of pieces of sports pages in our shredded pile and they would be far outnumbered by an overwhelming mass of extraneous fragments.

This problem can at least be somewhat alleviated by cloning random fragments of a larger size, for example, about 20 kb. 
This fragmentation could be done by mechanically breaking up the DNA, but more commonly the DNA is treated with either one or sometimes a mixture of two restriction enzymes.
This is allowed to proceed only to a state of partial digestion, producing fragments that are in the range of 10 to 30 kb.
These can be treated to separate out the fragments that are about 20 kb in size and these then can be inserted into a simple vector.
It has been calculated that about one million clones would be needed to ensure a 90-95% chance that every one of the 20-kb fragments would be included.
Let's Adjust the blades on our shredder so that the pieces produced are bigger. 

At least we'll have fewer to search through.

Regardless of the exact method used, a collection of random DNA fragments that are put into a vector and cloned is referred to as a «gene library» or sometimes a «genomic library» or «gene bank.» This library is a complete set of clones containing the totality of the genome. 
Our exposure to clones thus far has been clones in the form of transformed bacterial colonies.
We'll put all identical photocopied pieces of our newspaper into, let's say, a million folders.
The gene library is a valuable resource of human DNA fragments for mapping and sequencing.
Once established, it serves as a means of maintaining a consistent supply of DNA for research.

The second approach to cloning a specific gene is in marked contrast to the use of genomic clones.
It involves creating much more specific DNA segments, termed complementary DNA or cDNA.
It takes advantage of the fact that, because of the way proteins are made, the nitrogenous base sequence of messenger RNA is a direct complement to the sequence of the actual gene. 

Because of that fact, cDNA can be synthesized by using its mRNA.

The «Central Dogma» that DNA makes RNA makes protein experienced a sudden transition from a universal statement to a generality in 1970.
In that year, Howard Temin and David Baltimore independently discovered the enzyme «reverse transcriptase.» It was found in certain types of viruses, the «retroviruses,» that contain RNA rather than DNA.
The retroviruses include in their number such important pathogens as certain hepatitis and leukemia viruses, as well as the infamous causative agent of AIDS known officially as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

In this form of viral attack, RNA, and not DNA, enters the eucaryotic cell.
The reverse transcriptase enzyme uses the RNA of the virus as a template to form a complementary single strand of DNA, literally making one side of the ordinarily two-sided double helix.
The latter then serves as a template for the formation of a second strand complementary to it, thereby forming a double-stranded DNA.
This DNA then actually enters the chromosomal DNA of the host cell where it is replicated during cell divisions.
Later (in the case of AIDS, sometimes many years later), this DNA becomes active and directs the synthesis of new, infectious retro- viral particles which leave the cell and enter other cells.

In carrying out the mRNA to cDNA synthesis in the laboratory, it makes sense to obtain the mRNA from cells in which the gene that one is trying to clone is highly active.
For example, cells in the human pancreas contain relatively high concentrations of mRNA that help make insulin, and the cells that mature into red blood cells are rich in mRNA because they are carrying the message for the gene in charge of making hemoglobin.
As a result, isolation of mRNA from such cells provides an enriched sample of specific mRNA.
Almost pure hemoglobin mRNA can readily be prepared from immature red blood cells.
With reverse transcriptase, cDNA can be prepared and used as the DNA source for further cloning.

Now that we have a source of DNA for cloning, whether it be large fragments or much more specific cDNA molecules, a suitable cloning vector for our human DNA must be selected.
We have already described the use of plasmids such as pSC101 in the early days of the revolutionary technique of recombinant DNA.
After their initial successes, Boyer and his colleagues developed a set of very popular vectors known as the pBR series. 
In creating plasmids for use as cloning vectors, several characteristics are desirable.

One is the ability of the plasmid to function as a «high copy plasmid,» that is, the capacity to copy itself repeatedly in the cell, sometimes as many as 1000 times.
This, of course, greatly increases the final yield of genes carried by those plasmids.
In addition, the plasmid should have a system to demonstrate the presence of foreign DNA inserts.

You will recall that the first such marker was resistance to an antibiotic.
A variety of antibiotic-resistant factors have been engineered into plasmid vectors.
One of these plasmids, pBR322, has been widely used.
It has a high copy number and has two genes for antibiotic resistance-both to tetracycline and to ampicillin.

Modifications of pBR322 were used by Boyer's group in 1977 in their synthesis of the human gene which makes human growth regulating hormone.
The gene was cloned and the hormone is now available to the medical community.
In August 1990 researchers reported that, in a clinical trial, treatment of elderly persons with the growth regulating hormone dramatically reversed several characteristics of aging including skin and muscle tone.

While commonly used to carry relatively small DNA fragments, plasmids are limited by the size of the DNA that they can carry. 
Plasmids typically can carry DNA sequences of up to 12 kb.
Larger DNA segments can be carried by the DNA molecule derived from the well-known lambda phage.
This has been engineered to be particularly useful for human genome analysis. 

Such vectors have been named by their creator Fred Blattner «Charon» phages.
Charon, another mythological figure, is the boatman on the river Styx.
Just as Charon ferries souls to the underworld, the Charon phage carries DNA to the bacterial cells.
The most common use for the Charon phages is in the construction of genomic libraries.
The phages have been cleverly engineered to accept only DNA between 12 and 20 kb.
That assures that clones with insignificant amounts of DNA do not clutter up the library.
Even at that, at 12 to 20 kb per clone one needs about a million clones for a complete library.

Other vectors have been developed for specialized purposes, such as «cosmid» vectors for carrying DNA fragments of up to 40-50 kb.

Recently, a relatively new form of vector has been gaining increasing use in human genome analysis.
It is the «YAC», or yeast artificial chromosome, developed in 1987 by David T. Burke, George F. Carle, and Maynard V. Olson at the Washington University School of Medicine.
A major advantage in cloning genes in yeast is the ability to clone large pieces of DNA.
Many human DNA sequences of interest are quite large.

For example, the gene for the blood clotting factor VIII covers about 190 kb or about 0.1% of the human X chromosome and the Duchenne muscular dystrophy gene covers more than I million bases.

The YAC is DNA ingeniously engineered by assembling the essential functional parts of a natural yeast chromosome.
A fragment of human DNA is spliced into this and the chromosome is inserted into a yeast cell where the YAC is reproduced during cell division.
The result is a DNA clone within yeast cells rather than bacterial cells.
So widespread has the use of yeast become in genetic analysis that James Watson, in his textbook of molecular genetics The Molecular Biology of the Gene , calls yeast «... the E. coli of eucaryotic cells.» The 1990 Department of Energy/National Institutes of Health five- year plan includes a major effort to improve the available YAC vectors and the YAC cloning procedures, particularly as regards increasing the size of the DNA fragments that can be cloned as well as further improvements in methods to later separate them from the yeast.

Regardless of the specific method selected in the preparation of gene libraries or in the cloning of cells containing specific gene sequences of interest, scientists are left with a final analytical problem.
A convenient method is needed for separating and analyzing the many thousands of fragments in the gene library, deciding which transformed cells actually contain the desired gene, and separating that gene from all of the other DNA in the sample.
Which folders contain the Mets' score? 
There is one million and they all look alike.

DISEASE, DIAGNOSIS, AND THERAPY

Our chromosomes may house a total of more than 100,000 genes.
Most of the instructions emanating from these DNA codes initiate and integrate a complex variety of chemical reactions characteristic of a normal, healthy organism.
Genes direct the synthesis of enzymes and these in turn control the cell's metabolism, which more often than not functions normally-with some notable exceptions.

Some genes, buried within our chromosomes, may be damaged and flawed but remain active.
They can cause often rare but devastating physical and mental disease.
For example, 30% of the young patients admitted to pediatric hospitals in North America have diseases that can be traced directly to genetic causes.
More and more we are recognizing that genetic flaws also contribute to many common disease conditions such as cancer, heart disease, and diabetes.

The urge to understand how we and other living organisms function at the cellular and molecular level has been a major impetus for scientific investigation.
The enormous possibilities inherent in mapping and sequencing genomes have fueled these studies with a sense of urgency, which is further compounded by a new hope of relieving human suffering.

Even a slight genetic error can derail protein production, resulting in disease and deformity.
More than 3000 inherited diseases are thought to be due to aberrations in single genes. 
Many more are influenced by combinations of genes.
The major participants in the HGP are uniquely qualified by experience and orientation to bring particular attention to bear on those altered genes which are the agents of disease.

The Department of Energy has a congressional mandate to monitor inherited damage due to low-level exposure to radiation. 
The DOE Los Alamos National Laboratory has been the home of GenBank, the major U.S. DNA sequence data base, since 1983. 
A major portion of the research in human genetics and the breakthroughs in DNA methodology have been supported by NIH funding.
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) has long supported biomedical research on basic genetic mechanisms and genetic disease as well as supplying funding for the Human Gene Mapping Library and the «On-Line Mendelian Inheritance in Man» data bases.
HHMI also collaborates with the Center for the Study of Human Polymorphisms (CEPH) headquartered in Paris, France.

In addition, the study of the inheritance patterns of disease related to specific genes has traditionally supported the mapping of genes to their relative positions on specific chromosomes. 
It is not surprising then that many of the early successes flowing from the initiatives that sparked the HGP have been those that have located and characterized human disease genes.

Our search for the sites of our genes has just begun.
Only about 5000 have been assigned to approximate locations on our chromosomes.

However, in the 1980s and 1990s the emerging technology of mapping and sequencing-made possible first by the molecular biology revolution of the 1970s-has already produced some remarkable discoveries about the location and function of a variety of devastating genetic disorders.

Diagnosis has become possible, diseased genes have been isolated, and the way to prevention, treatment, or cure can now reasonably be sought.

This chapter is the story of how some of those discoveries have come about and what this means to the human condition.

GENETIC DISEASE

The history of humankind is a story of the struggle to gain control over our surroundings, particularly in so far as they impinge on our safety and comfort.
The growth of agriculture, shelter, transportation, and all such various accomplishments contributing to the definition of civilization have sought to keep nature at bay and, too often destructively, to bend it to our will.
Whatever control we may have gained over disease is largely a product of the twentieth century.

Idealize if you wish the «noble savage,» but life for the human species has been an experience marked by almost unrelieved suffering at the hands of invisible agents.
Any insight into the role of bacteria and viruses in disease is a recent phenomenon.
So too has been the realization that inheritable diseases are governed by genes which are passed on from generation to generation.
The effects of such disease arise from causes not from our surroundings, but from deep within our very cells.

The mid-1940s can truly be said to have ushered in the age of modern medicine.
Antibiotics, first in the form of penicillin which became available only near the end of the World War II, have since been followed by an increasing number of antibacterial medications and immunizations against bacteria and viral pathogens.
Humans had, for the first time, bath preventive measures and effective therapeutic agents against infectious disease.

Genetic disease presents an entirely different scenario. 
The effects of sickle-cell anemia, adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, retinoblastoma, Tay-Sachs syndrome, polycystic kidney disease, cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease, and a host of other conditions lend themselves only to palliative measures at best.
They are caused by genes whose very existence until recently were unknown.
Even after the role of those genes and their molecular architecture were revealed, the genes themselves remained as remote and inaccessible as ever.
Then came the miracle of molecular biology and the realization began to dawn that the gene might in fact be amenable to direct manipulation.

Is it any wonder that this possibility has captured the imagination of scientists?
The HGP is a frontal assault on the genetic fate dealt to each human.
The mapping and sequencing of genes is intended to lead to knowledge that will allow diagnosis, treatment, cure, and prevention of the genetic diseases that diminish the lives of so many people.

Questions may legitimately be raised about whether or not these ends are best achieved by a research effort on such a grand scale as the HGP but one would have difficulty questioning the intellectual and emotional appeal of the opportunity to gain some measure of control over our genetic inheritance.
Another chapter will look at the ethical issues raised by such power over human inheritance.
Here we will explain the science, what has been done and what waits in the wings.

Let's briefly review a few concepts necessary to follow the details of genetic disease research.
A gene, through the intermediary messenger RNA, directs the synthesis of a chain of amino acids.
This chain is the polypeptide which may, by itself or in conjunction with one or more other polypeptides, assume a complex three-dimensional configuration and become a protein.
Some of these proteins act as enzymes, catalysts that drive the chemical reactions of the living cell.
When we study the function of a gene we are focusing on one tiny corner of a vast network of interrelated metabolic reactions. 

A defective gene is one which may no longer carry the correct code in the form of a nitrogenous base sequence for a particular polypeptide.

The incorrect message may be expressed as an incorrect amino acid sequence and the protein can no longer function as a catalyst.
As a result, a particular chemical reaction is blocked and as a corollary, all of the reactions that would normally have occurred as a result of that initial reaction are likewise halted.
A typical case would be the situation in which the correct gene for converting the amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine is missing.
The result is phenylketonuria (PKU) which causes brain damage and diminished head size.

As mentioned a number of times, we carry two copies of most of our genes in the nucleus of each cell with the exception of the gametes, which retain only one copy after their formation by meiosis.
The pairs of genes (the alleles) occur at the same site on both members of a chromosome pair, one inherited from the male and the other from the female parent.
If the genes are identical, the person is homozygous for those alleles and it they differ, she or he is heterozygous.

A gene causing a defect may be either dominant or recessive, depending on the disease in question.
If dominant, it can exert its effects even in the heterozygous condition; if it is recessive, the homozygous condition must be present.
If the recessive disease gene is present in a heterozygous setting, that is, paired with a dominant gene, it will remain silent and unexpressed.
The person heterozygous for that gene is a «carrier.» Only when two recessive genes, one from each of two carriers, combines in the act of fertilization between the sperm and the egg, each containing 23 chromosomes, to reconstitute the full complement of 46 human chromosomes, can the symptoms of the disease appear.

The sex of humans is determined by the presence of two sex chromosomes.
The female has two X chromosomes while the male contains one X and one Y in each cell.
The X chromosomes are homologous, but the X bears many loci which are not present on the smaller Y chromosome.
Defective genes on the X are therefore more apt to be expressed in the male due to the lack of a corresponding allele.
They are not functional in the female unless she is homozygous recessive.

Most genetic diseases that are caused by single-gene defects are due to recessive alleles.
Since two of these must occur together in the homozygous state, one can understand why marriages between two closely related people would be more apt to bring together two recessives since the gene in question would be distributed within that related group.

1t has been established that first cousin marriages account for about 20% of albino children and as many as SS of children with the fatal Tay-Sachs disease.
Even though the majority of the recognized recessive genetic diseases are quite rare, in combination they represent an enormous burden of human suffering. 

There are several well-known disease states attributable to dominant alleles.
Achondroplasia (a kind of dwarfism). 
Huntington's disease and brachydactyly (very short fingers) are caused by the presence of a dominant allele.
Another is hypercholesterolemia, characterized by elevated blood levels of cholesterol and resulting in heart attacks.
It is considered to be the most common genetic disorder, inherited in Mendelian fashion.
It affects one out of every 500 people.

Other disorders are sex-linked.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and hemophilia result from genes on the X chromosome, accounting for the fact that such conditions are very rare in females.
They would need two affected X chromosomes in order to exhibit the disease state.
Please note that although there is a large category of diseases traced to single-gene defects, some fatal and others with varying degrees of seventy, many genetic disease conditions are due to a complexity of interacting genes. 

Multifactorial complex diseases, such as atherosclerosis, or vascular disease, are prominent examples.
Also, some forms of cancer require the presence of both cancer-causing genes and defects in tumor-suppressor genes.
Problems caused by multiple genes are much more difficult to trace and to analyze so that most of the attention has been focused on single-gene defects which are also more amenable to treatment.

We have already introduced the concepts of mapping and sequencing in earlier chapters.
Now let's look at several outstanding examples of how such advances have been appropriated to seek out prominent disease genes.
They are also examples of «reverse genetics.» This means that one is able to find at least the approximate location of a gene or genes that cause(s) a disease in which one has no idea of the specific biochemical defect involved.
This is in contrast to a disease such as sickle-cell anemia, in which there is an obvious defect in the hemoglobin-carrying red blood cells which points to a probable defect within the hemoglobin gene.
These examples of reverse genetics can be thought of as a paradigm for what scientists can expect to accomplish through the HGP. 

Let's look at the recent detective work that has contributed to our current understanding of several major human genetic diseases. 
Direct treatment of the genetic flaws underlying these conditions is not now possible.
We will conclude with a discussion of the scientific bases for the hopes that this may be within our reach.

Cystic Fibrosis

In Chapter I we introduced the story of the search for the cystic fibrosis gene.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease that affects the lungs, pancreas, and sweat glands.
The symptoms appear in infancy and are characterized by chronic lung infection, abnormal pancreatic function, and a high salt content in the sweat.
These are due to the fact that there is a defect in certain pores in the membranes of cells which fails to allow chloride to enter the cells.
The result is a thick mucus which clogs the respiratory passages in the lungs and plugs the ducts of the pancreas and liver, interfering with breathing and digestion.
Those with CF usually succumb to respiratory infections.

CF affects I in every 1800 white and I in every 17,000 black people.

One out of 22 whites carries the recessive gene and CF is present when there is a homozygous combination of two recessive genes.
The average survival age of people with CF is 25 years.

After seven years of intensive searching, a team of Canadian and American researchers located this recessive gene.
In 1985, Lap-Chee Tsui and John R. Riordan at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children had mapped it to chromosome 7 by gene linkage analysis using RFLPs.

Patterns of inheritance within hundreds of families affected by cystic fibrosis were studied.
The investigators found two marker sites which were located on either side of an area on chromosome 7, as indicated by the fact that these markers were typically inherited along with the disease.

The chromosomal area flanked by the markers was isolated by a combination of human-rodent cell hybrids and restriction enzyme gene mapping, assisted by gel electrophoresis.
Many pieces of DNA fragments from a flow-sorted genomic library specific to chromosome 7 were cloned.
By 1988, the distance between the markers had been «reduced» to a distance of 1.5 million base pairs.
There remained the formidable tusk o1 searching that long nitrogenous base sequence for the deficient gene.
This was accomplished by chromosome «walking» and «Jumping.» «Walking» along a chromosome is a term used to describe a technique which sometimes permits one to isolate a gene sequence when its approximate location is known.
One begins with the DNA segment that contains the gene as well as an additional length of DNA containing an area that always hybridizes to a particular probe.
The probe is used as a starting point to try to isolate the disease-specific gene itself.
A clone is isolated from a genomic library that contains a segment of the genome corresponding to the probe. 
A portion of the clone farthest away from the probe hybridization site is isolated and used to rescreen the library for new clones that overlap it hut are still farther away from the first probe. 

This process is repeated many times and one «walks along» toward the area of the gene in steps of 20 or so kilobases.
This is a slow, tedious process and can be accelerated by «jumping.» This refers to the practice of using restriction enzymes which cut the DNA infrequently and thus generate larger fragments, thereby furnishing longer probing distances.
The use of PAGE and YACs allow the handling and cloning of these large fragments.
A key difference between walking and jumping is that in the latter the large DNA fragments are formed into circles and the DNA from the area where the circle closes is cut out and cloned, thus bringing together DNA sequences that were originally far apart on the DNA.
These cloned DNAs from the closure site make up a «jumping» library.
In the case of the CF gene search, jumps of up to 100 kb were possible with this shortcut.

By January 1989 the researchers, now joined by Dr. Francis Collins of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the University of Michigan, had narrowed the search to a stretch of about 300,000 base pairs big enough to account for several genes.
Then walking took over to move along the DNA in small increments so as not to pass over the CF gene.

Several other approaches were used in these final stages. 
For example, all of the messenger RNA made by cells in human sweat glands was extracted and cDNAs were prepared.
These were used as probes to locate a large gene extending across about 250,000 bases in a mosaic composed of 24 exons separated by noncoding introns.
The gene turned out to be missing only three nitrogenous bases that coded for inserting phenylalanine into position 508 in a polypeptide.
The cystic fibrosis gene had been found.

The news made world headlines.
Hopes were raised for the possibility of accurate diagnostic tests for carriers and perhaps even treatment for those with the disease.
However, as it turned out, 70% of the defective CF genes were missing the code for phenylalanine while 30% of the CF genes had at least one other form of the mutation not yet analyzed. 
As the months passed after the initial euphoria, researchers across the world found to their growing surpise and discontent that more than 40 different mutations are capable of causing CF, thus making it impossible to develop a convenient prenatal screening test which would detect all forms of the gene.

There are striking racial and geographic differences.
In Denmark, for example, 90% of the CF mutations involve the loss of phenylalanine while in Israel only 30% of CF mutations involve this loss.
This has slowed the development of a satisfactory prenatal screening test, which to be accurate would have to detect the vast majority of CF-causing mutations. 

The multiplicity of mutations that can cause CF also complicates the problem of understanding how the gene defect causes the disease. 

Researchers still do not know what specific protein the gene encodes, although the most favorable hypothesis is that it is a protein dubbed CFTR, or «cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.» That protein is necessary to control the passage of chloride across cell membranes.

On September 20, 1990, newspapers carried the dramatic announcement that two research groups, using viruses as vectors, had introduced normal genes into cystic fibrosis lung cells growing in the laboratory.
The genes began making the proteins that cystic fibrosis patients lack.
This may lead the way in years to come to translate this into a therapy for humans, perhaps by packaging these normal genes in harmless viruses that would be inhaled in nasal spray.

Huntington's Disease

Equally tantalizing and frustrating has been the remarkable progress in the quest for the genetic cause of Huntington's disease (HD), a relatively rare disorder.
Traced to the effects of a single dominant gene, the onset of this tragic disorder is insidious.
There is a gradual degeneration of nerve cells in the brain which may begin as early as the age of 2 or as late as a person's 80s but usually exhibits its deadly symptoms in midlife.

The disease achieved notoriety during the 1960s when it led to the death of the beloved folk singer Woody Guthrie.

The duration of the disease can be as long as 25 years, during which time there is gradual loss of control over the voluntary muscles, first causing twitches, then large random motions followed by dementia and finally death.
Tragically, people with HD maintain a social intelligence- an awareness that they can no longer control their physical faculties and are unable to communicate their needs and feelings to others.

Unlike almost all other genetic diseases, HD inexplicably has a delayed onset, becoming evident in many cases long after the affected individual has become a parent.
Since a dominant gene is responsible, each child of a parent with the disease has a 50-50 chance of inheriting it.

Before 1983, diagnosis of a parent after the symptoms had become unmistakable told the offspring only these odds.
Since that time the presence of the gene has been detectable through an RFLP marker.

The path that led to this unique marker began long before 1983.
In 1955, Americo Negrette, a physician working at a military base near Lake Maracaibo, Venezuela, documented the disease among the inhabitants of a cluster of nearby small villages. 
At first Dr. Negrette thought that many of the villagers whom he had often observed staggering about the streets were drunk.
When it was finally explained to him that they were ill, he began taking careful histories and determined that this was, in fact, HD, or as it was then called, Huntington's «chorea,» meaning «dancelike movement.» Nancy Wexler, a clinical psychologist, has both a professional and personal interest in HD.
Her mother had succumbed to the disease so that Wexler and her sister were at risk.
Her father, Dr. Milton Wexler, had established the Hereditary Disease Foundation dedicated to finding a cure for HD as well as to support research in other areas of inheritable diseases. 
Nancy Wexler and her colleagues successfully recommended that NIH initiate a study of the unique Venezuelan population. 

When the research group first went to Venezuela in 1979 their intent was to search out someone who was homozygous for the gene.
Once they had begun field work in earnest in 1981, however, recombinant DNA technology had expanded to the point where their emphasis switched from only classical genetic linkage studies to collecting blood samples from which to extract DNA for RFLP analysis.
As it turned out, the family tree which they uncovered was far beyond their expectations.
It included over 10,000 people and has proven to be a rich resource for understanding inheritance in general as well as providing a major genetic linkage reference for other diseases.

HD is a perfect example of what is known in genetics as the «founder effect.» This refers to a high frequency of a gene in a population because that population began or was «founded» with a small number of people, at least one of whom carried the gene in question.

Interbreeding within the initial limited population spread the gene.
The Venezuelan group has been traced back seven generations to a woman whose father, a European, carried the defective gene.

There is another intensively studied population in southeastern Australia where records show that least 432 Australian HD sufferers have inherited the gene of an English widow, a Miss Cundick, who took her 13 children from two marriages and emigrated to Australia in 1848.

James Gusella, Michael Conneally, and a large team of collaborators at Massachusetts General Hospital had spent a decade trying to find a gene linked to the inheritance of HD but to no avail. 
Almost immediately after they began to look for an RFLP marker associated with it, they succeeded.
They found a hybridizing probe which they called G8 among the first dozen that they tried.
This probe hybridized to an RFLP that is very close to the HD gene.
The gene turned out to be located on chromosome 4 as determined by probing human-mouse hybrid cell lines.
Only the cell line containing chromosome 4 hybridized with the G8 probe.

The inheritance pattern is somewhat complicated in that there are four possible variations of the RFLPs that can be found in the affected families.
Each person receives two RFLP patterns, one from each of the parents.
Southern hybridizations of restriction enzyme fragments from the DNA of a Venezuelan individual showing the so-called «C» pattern have the disease or will develop it later on in life.
In contrast, other families in other countries may have the «A» type of RFLP pattern.
There is variation here but the RFLP type remains consistent within a family grouping.

So far, scientists are within a few million bases of the gene.

Unfortunately, the sequence within the area of the gene is of such a base pattern that restriction enzymes tend to cut it into many small fragments, making a detailed mapping of the region very difficult to construct.
New RFLPs must be found closer to the gene and flanking it on either side.

Then, once the search has been narrowed to a piece of DNA approximately 500 kb or less, chromosome jumping and walking can proceed with some reasonable chance of success.

The exact nature of the HD gene itself, unlike that of the CF gene, remains a mystery but with the RFLP markers diagnosis is possible.
The child of a parent with HD now has the option to have an RFLP analysis to ascertain the presence of the deadly dominant gene.
Should the person undergo the test and discover either that she or he lacks the defective gene or harbors it in every cell?
If the HD gene is not there this means that none of her or his children are at risk (assuming that the other parent is negative as well).
If the gene is found, the person can look forward to undergoing the same progressive loss of physical integrity that he or she has witnessed in his or her parent.

The odds are 50-50 of passing the gene on to his or her children.

RFLPs, chromosome jumping, PCR, and other molecular genetics technology takes on a new air of importance when viewed by those who look to them as the only means of isolating and cloning the gene which lies waiting in their DNA like a time bomb.
When the gene is isolated and its function understood, scientists hope that some form of gene therapy may be possible.

Alzheimer's Disease

The data collected from the massive Venezuelan family network has been used for studying a whole array of genetic diseases. 
Normal maps of gene marker locations have been made by using the Venezuelan family samples.
These normal maps are then compared with the chromosome maps of other family groups exhibiting other diseases of interest, families that are often too small to be used for productive mapping.

Prominent among the genes that the Venezuelan samples have helped to map is the gene for familial Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
This condition presents a complex and frustrating interplay between genetic and other often undetermined factors.
While genetics undoubtedly plays a role, and up to 50% of the members of some families develop Alzheimer's, this accounts for fewer than I of 20 who have the disease.

AD may afflict more than i0% of people aged 65 and older and nearly 50% of those 80 years and above.
It is a degenerative disorder of the central nervous system characterized by impairment of memory and intellectual function often resulting in a profound mental and physical disability that may necessitate institutional care.
Death usually occurs within five to ten years after the onset of symptoms.
AD costs an estimated $25 billion per year in the United States alone.
Of course, the cost in suffering for the patients and their families is incalculable. 

No effective treatment for either preventing or arresting the progress of AD has been found.
In 1987, a 22-member international research team reported tracing the genetic defect causing family-related AD to chromosome 21.

Interestingly. this is the same chromosome implicated in Down's syndrome, a very common fowl of mental retardation.
It is almost always caused by the presence of an extra chromosome 21 in each cell.
People with Down's syndrome, if they live long enough. often develop AD.
Again, the promise held out by finding markers linked to the AD gene is that it narrows the search for the gene itself.

An understanding of the AD defect at the molecular level might make it possible to define the biochemical pathways involved in the initiation and progress of the chemical and neuropathological features of the disease.
Brain disorders are very difficult to treat.
Most drugs, though they may circulate freely in the blood, cannot leave the blood vessels and enter brain tissue.
Neurons, the cell type that makes up most of the brain and nerves cannot be removed and treated without causing serious damage.

However, experiments with animals indicate that it may he possible to implant genetically altered fibroblasts (connective tissue cells) into the brain, where they stimulate release of a nerve growth factor in the kind of neurons whose malfunction is associated with memory loss in Alzheimer's disease.

This may prove to he a useful gene delivery system when causative genes are eventually isolated.

Clues may also be found as to how environmental factors affect nongenetic AD.
Meanwhile, as the gene hunt continues. the National Institute on Aging estimates that as many as 14 million Americans will have Alzheimer's disease by the middle of the next century.
