
The aims of genetic engineering

Techniques of gene manipulation

Genetic engineering implies 'changing genes'.
These changes may occur as the result of the transfer of a gene from its normal location into a cell which does not normally contain it; or a gene may have its sequence altered in some way, so that it is a different gene.
Such an altered gene may, of course, also be transferred to a new cell type.
To avoid confusion with conventional breeding techniques, or with the naturally occurring process of gene transfer by plasmids, it is assumed that genetic engineering, or genetic manipulation, also involves some processes which are carried out in vitro.

Conventional breeding

Why is there a need for genetic engineering?
It is true that a great deal has been and will continue to be achieved by conventional breeding programmes.

Methods used for the 'breeding' of improved microbial strains, using conjugation or, more rarely, parasexual gene transfer between strains, have been described in Section 9.3.1, and will not be repeated here.
In general, the breeder aims to introduce a desirable gene into an organism which already has many attractive attributes.
This is done by crossing the organism with another which contains the desired gene, but which is in many other respects less than perfect.
The hope is that the progeny of such a cross will combine the good features of the first organism with the desired gene of the second.
Unfortunately, the chances of such a perfect combination of genes occurring tend to be vanishingly small; in fact, there is just as much likelihood of obtaining progeny with only the undesirable features of each parent.
Consequently, the breeder has to select those progeny which contain the desired gene, and which have also retained many of the good features of the first parent. 
If these are then crossed with the first parent, the resulting progeny will, on average, contain fewer unwanted genes than did the first generation, although some will also have lost the desired gene and must therefore be discarded.
By such repeated back-crossing of selected progeny, the breeder can reach the stage where, for practical purposes, he has effectively transferred only the desired gene into the genome of the first organism. 
Even then, further crosses must take place between the progeny to generate organisms which are homozygous for the 'transferred' gene, and will therefore be 'true' breeding.

It should be obvious that conventional breeding takes a long time, even when tricks are used to stack the odds in the breeder's favour.
The most rapid progress can be made when the organisms to be crossed are already very similar, since this will reduce the number of back-crosses needed .
However , the most useful genes tend to be found in organisms which are very different from the 'target' organism.
If crossing is possible, the production of a 'true' strain will be very time-consuming, but feasible.
Unfortunately, fertilization can usually only be achieved between organisms of the same, or closely related, species, so the 'pool' of genes available to any organism via conventional breeding is often very limited.
This is why it is so important to maintain breeding stocks of a wide variety of 'outclassed' varieties of plants and animals, since they act as the gene pool for further breeding programmes.

The variety of the gene pool available to a species can be increased by the creation of mutants, using chemical mutagens or high energy radiation, as has been described for micro-organisms (see Section 9.2).
However, since there is no control over which genes are mutated, the vast majority of such mutations will be lethal, harmful, or neutral.
It may be that a beneficial mutation is generated but not detected, owing to the simultaneous creation of a lethal mutation in another gene of the same cell.
Clearly mutagenesis is only useful if highly efficient methods are available for screening to detect beneficial mutations (see Section 9.2).
The method is also restricted to unicellular organisms or those which can be grown from cultured cells or embryos, since its random mode of action rules out the possibility of producing identical mutations in all the cells of an animal or plant by treatment of the whole organism.
As will be seen, this limitation also applies to most types of genetic engineering.

Protoplasts and cell cloning

As described in Section 9.3.2, the efficiency of recombination between the genomes of different microbial strains can be greatly increased by the use of 'protoplast fusion'.
This technique can also be applied to the cells of plants and animals.
When the walls of plant cells are digested by pectinases and cellulases, in a medium which is iso-osmotic with the cell contents, spherical protoplasts are produced, being effectively naked cells bounded only by their plasma membranes.
With careful handling these protoplasts will regenerate cell walls, will grow and divide, and each protoplast will eventually give rise to a cluster of cloned cells which can be grown indefinitely as undifferentiated callus tissue.
In many cases whole plants can be produced from the callus by altering the levels of plant growth hormones in the medium, and so it is possible to produce a limitless number of plants cloned from a single protoplast.

Most importantly, by use of a reagent such as polyethylene glycol, or a pulsed electrical field, protoplasts can be induced to fuse with each other prior to cell wall regeneration.
Such fusions can occur between cells of species which are sexually incompatible, resulting in the formation of hybrid cells.

Unfortunately these hybrids are unstable , and one complete set of chromosomes is eventually eliminated, but not before there has been some transfer of genes between the two.
Since the exchange of DNA is random, there is only a small chance that any fusion product will contain a specific 'foreign' gene, consequently some type of selection must be used to pick out the wanted cells.

This can often only be done once plants have been regenerated from each cell line, unless the desired gene codes for a product which can be detected biochemically at the callus stage.
In spite of its unpredictability and technical difficulty, protoplast fusion is a valuable addition to the plant breeders' more conventional techniques.
For example, it has been used to transfer disease resistance from primitive Solanum species into modern commercial potato cultivars, with which they cannot be crossed sexually.

Animal cells also can be induced to fuse, and they normally form unstable hybrid cells; however, since whole animals cannot be regenerated from single cells, this technique has not been used as an adjunct to conventional animal breeding programmes. 
Animal cell fusion has, however, assumed enormous importance since the discovery by Milstein and Kohler that normal antibody-producing cells could be fused with malignant (myeloma) cells to produce 'hybridoma' cells, each of which would then produce a single type of antibody. the hybridoma cells can be separated from each other and then cultured indefinitely, each clone producing a unique product, known as a 'monoclonal' antibody.
These antibodies are proving of immense value in medicine and molecular biology, since they are far more effective than mixtures of different antibodies in discriminating between similar antigens.

Another method of producing new characteristics in a plant is based on the phenomenon of 'somaclonal variation', in which it is found that plants cloned from different cells of the same original plant may possess different, heritable characteristics. 
It is not possible to predict what new characteristics could appear, and many will be undesirable, but the method has proved its value in the production of new, improved varieties of potato and wheat.

Potential products of genetic engineering 

There is one important area of genetic manipulation in which conventional breeding is completely powerless, namely the transfer of a gene from a higher organism into a bacterial or yeast cell, with the aim of obtaining synthesis of the gene product by the transformed cells in culture.
But, since the gene products are produced by the animals or plants from which they are derived, why should we go to all the trouble of persuading lower organisms to do the same job?
The answer is usually based on the cost of isolating adequate quantities of product from the natural source, or on the sheer impossibility of obtaining sufficient starting material.

Pharmaceuticals .
One has only to consider a selection of some of the polypeptides which are of pharmaceutical value to appreciate the enormous potential of genetic engineering for their production.

For example, many haemophiliacs are unable to stop bleeding because of their inability to produce a polypeptide called human blood clotting factor VIII, which is normally present in human blood, though at very low concentrations.

Fortunately, they can be prevented from bleeding to death by the injection of factor VIII, purified from vast quantities of human blood.
Not only is the preparation of factor VIII a very expensive process, owing to its low initial concentration in a liquid which is in short supply and of value in its own right, but, since each preparation is derived from the blood of many thousands of donors, there is a significant risk that dangerous viruses, such as those for hepatitis or AIDS, may be transmitted to haemophiliacs in their injections of clotting factor.

Similar problems of production arise with other polypeptides which have to be extracted from human serum or tissues: tissue plasminogen activator could be used to dissolve unwanted blood clots blocking blood vessels, thus relieving thrombosis; calcitonin, possibly in conjunction with parathyroid hormone, may be of great value in stimulating a strengthening of the brittle bones so often found in elderly people.
A nerve growth factor has been identified which could promote the repair and regeneration of damaged nerves.
Human growth hormone is a polypeptide already used to treat children suffering from hypopituitarism, a condition that would otherwise result in severely stunted growth, or dwarfism.

Fortunately, the relatively low incidence of dwarfism means that it can be controlled using hormone extracted from the pituitaries of human cadavers, but there are indications that human growth hormone could also be of value in the treatment of burns, to promote the healing of wounds and fractured bones, and to treat bones weakened by decalcification.
Since supplies of hormone from human pituitaries are almost entirely used up in treating dwarfism, any expansion of the application of human growth hormone can only occur if it can be produced by genetically engineered micro-organisms.

Possibly the best known example of a genetically engineered polypeptide used for the treatment of humans is insulin.
This hormone is essential for the correct regulation of blood sugar levels; if it is not produced by the pancreas, diabetes will result, which must then be kept under control by injections of insulin.
Since there are estimated to be about 60 million diabetics in the world, of which about 25 million are in developed countries (that is, they can pay for their drugs), there is a huge market for insulin.
For most diabetics, insulin obtained from pigs or cattle appears to work as effectively as the human variety, as might be expected in view of the fact that they differ from human insulin in only one or three amino acids respectively. 
However, some diabetics can develop an allergic response to the animal insulins, and there is debate over the long-term side effects of using a 'foreign' hormone.
These reservations prompted attempts to produce 'human' insulin by genetically engineered bacteria, and it looked as if the first company to succeed would make a fortune.
Unfortunately for these companies, research into ways of modifying insulin chemically was making headway, to such an extent that it is now possible to modify pig insulin to exactly the same structure as human insulin.
The battle between the two processes for insulin production will therefore be fought on economic grounds and, in view of the plentiful supply of pig pancreases, victory for the biotechnologists seems unlikely. 

Another group of polypeptides which has caused a lot of excited speculation is the interferons.
These molecules are produced naturally by the human body in response to viral infections, and appear to have antiviral and antitumour properties. 
However, as with many such compounds, so little could be produced from human tissue (white blood cells and fibroblasts in the case of interferons) that it was not possible to carry out satisfactory clinical trials to establish their properties. 
In view of their possible therapeutic effects, programmes were established with the aim of producing interferons on a large scale in bacteria.
Three types of interferon have been produced in this way.
Although they certainly do not appear to be the 'wonder drugs' that some had predicted, they do seem to have a significant effect on the immune system, resulting in greatly improved resistance to a range of viruses, and they are also effective in treating a few types of cancer, notably a rare leukaemia called hairy cell leukaemia. 
Ironically, they may be of most use against cancer by revealing more about how the immune system can detect and eliminate tumours.

Successors to interferon, as the most interesting 'anticancer' drugs, may be tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and lymphotoxin (LT). 
These polypeptides are produced by human cells, and they are able both to recognize tumour cells and to destroy them selectively. 
Although they are different molecules, they have some quite extensive sequences in common, and two regions which are highly conserved (that is, likely to have the same three-dimensional structure in both molecules) could turn out to be responsible for tumour cell recognition and cell destruction.
The genes for both TNF and LT have been cloned, and clinical trials of the bacterially synthesized molecules should reveal how effective they are against tumours and, most importantly, if they produce harmful side effects.

Vaccines .
Medical applications of genetically engineered micro-organisms are not limited to the synthesis of human polypeptides.
A very attractive use of such systems is in the production of vaccines.
The idea behind a vaccine is that it should contain molecules which produce the same antigenic response as the virus to which it will give immunity, without causing the harmful proliferation of viral particles within the body.

This can be achieved by the use of virus particles which have been in some way made harmless, but which still have the same outward appearance.
There are two problems, however. 
Incomplete inactivation of the virus may allow a few 'live' particles to survive, which would therefore actually be a source of infection; some occurrences of foot and mouth disease have been attributed to such vaccine preparations.
The other problem is that the virus has to be grown in animals, and in certain cases it will grow only in humans; in such cases human cell cultures must be used, which are expensive to maintain, and very slow growing by comparison with bacterial cells.
Since the market for vaccines can be immense (200 million people worldwide suffer from hepatitis B; 800 million doses of foot-and-mouth disease vaccine are given to livestock each year), it has been economically worthwhile to live with these problems.
However, it is the viral coat proteins which are antigenic, and so preparations of pure coat protein can act as an effective vaccine.
This immediately opens up the possibility of cloning and expressing the genes for the coat proteins in bacteria, and using the bacterial product as a vaccine.
Such vaccines would be guaranteed free of live virus, and should be cheaper than those produced using animal cell cultures.

Enzymes .
Enzymes can only be used on an industrial scale if their production costs are low (see Sections 13.2, 14.3 and 14.6.2), and this effectively means that they must be derived from cultures of micro-organisms.
In view of the immense variety of reactions carried out by microbes, it is likely that any enzyme which will be needed by biochemical engineers is already being made by some micro-organism.
However, it is also likely that a certain amount of genetic manipulation would improve the yield of enzyme, perhaps by transferring its gene into a faster growing, safer, more efficient host, or by attaching the gene to a stronger promoter in order to increase its level of expression.
By attaching suitable sequences to the gene it may be possible to trick the cell into exporting the enzyme, thus making its isolation easier.

Many enzymes become unstable when isolated from the cell, making them unsuitable for industrial use.
Genetic engineering offers the possibility of modifying the structure of an enzyme to increase its stability, alter its pH or temperature optima, change its affinity for substrate, etc., but such 'tuning' of enzymes will depend on a vast improvement in our understanding of exactly how enzymes work.

Improved cell lines .
Cell cultures are grown either for the production of a valuable molecule, such as an antibiotic, or in order to generate high quality biomass from a cheap feedstock, as in the case of single cell protein production.
In both cases there are strong commercial reasons for using cells which grow as efficiently as possible, in terms of energy conversion, and which are as well suited to their particular function as possible.
Several examples of the use of genetic engineering for enhancing the efficiency of growth of micro-organisms, or for increasing their yields of a useful product are presented in Section 9.3.3.

Animals .
To the non-scientist, the term 'genetic engineering' probably conjures up visions of a modern Dr., Frankenstein creating monstrous new creatures in his laboratory.
Ironically, the genetic manipulation of animal genomes seems unlikely to make as much progress over the next few years as that of other organisms.
As will be seen, genetic manipulation involves the selection of those cells whose genomes have been correctly altered from those which are either unaltered or incorrectly modified, followed by proliferation of the selected cells ('cloning').
This is the end of the story when we are dealing with unicellular organisms, such as bacteria or yeast, or with animal or plant cell cultures; but, for the production of genetically engineered animals or plants, whole organisms must then be regenerated from the cloned cells.
At present we are unable to regenerate animals from cloned cells, except to the limited extent of subdividing clusters of cells at the early stages of embryo development. 
Assuming this obstacle can be removed, there is still the problem of knowing which genes to modify.
The genomes of animals are immensely more complex than those of bacteria, yet their genetic analysis is made difficult by the relatively small populations available for investigation, and by their long generation times.
Add to this the knowledge that characteristics such as growth rate, milk yield, disease resistance and shape are determined by interactions between many different genes, and it becomes evident that we still have a long way to go before the quality of livestock can be improved by genetic engineering. 
However, in spite of these obstacles, there have already been some successful attempts to obtain expression of foreign genes in whole animals (see Section 11.3.3).

Plants .
By contrast, the genetics of the major crop plants are very well characterized.
The locations of a wide range of genes, of known function, have been determined, and many of these genes have been isolated, cloned, and even sequenced.
Such detailed analysis has been possible owing to the ease of producing vast numbers of plants from crossing experiments.

The problems of gene interaction to determine plant characteristics remains, but it has often been possible to identify one or two genes that have an especially strong influence on a particular characteristic.
Consequently there are many plant genes, coding for such attributes as resistance to disease, stress, or herbicides, and for seed storage proteins or components of the photosynthetic system, which the breeder might wish to transfer from one species to another.
It is possible to clone the cells of most plants by growth as a callus or in suspension culture, and whole plants can be regenerated from many of these .
In such cases there appears to be no reason why genetic engineering should not be used as a faster alternative to conventional breeding, and to bypass any barriers which prevent crosses between plants of different species.

Unfortunately, it is still not possible to regenerate plants from cell cultures of the most important, monocotyledonous (grass-like) crops, such as wheat or maize, and this remains the most serious impediment to their genetic manipulation.

The plant genetic engineer's fantasies do not stop at the transfer of genes from one plant to another; they range as far as introducing microbial genes into plants.
The most attractive genes include those which code for enzymes responsible for the degradation of certain herbicides, and which might therefore endow a plant with resistance to them.
Such resistance would be very useful in a crop, allowing herbicides to be used selectively against weeds after emergence of the crop.
Other potentially valuable genes are those which result in the production of insecticidal polypeptides by some bacteria, such as Bacillus thuringiensis .

Probably the most ambitious proposal is to introduce the genes for nitrogen fixation into plants from an organism such as Klebsiella pnenmoniae .
This would involve the transter of a large complex of 17 genes, known as the nif gene cluster, and a certain amount of manipulation of the cluster would be needed to ensure gene expression.
Because of the prokaryotic origin of the nif cluster, it has been suggested that the most sensible strategy would be to transfer it to the chloroplast, whose transcriptional and translational machinery has many prokaryotic features.
This approach also has the advantage that chloroplasts are geared to the production of ATP and reducing power, both of which are needed for nitrogen fixation.
There are, of course, problems, not the least of these being the sensitivity of nitrogenase to the oxygen which chloroplasts produce, and also the absence of a method for transforming chloroplasts.
However, in view of the massive annual consumption of artificial fertilizers, there is every incentive to overcome these problems. 
An alternative approach, which is receiving considerable attention, is to introduce into crop plants genes responsible for association with nitrogen-fixing micro-organisms, using genetic engineering.

It is easy to be carried away by the exciting possibilities of genetic manipulation, and to assume that the ideas discussed above will come to fruition within the next few years.
There are enormous commercial pressures for rapid progress, but also many technical problems, and some serious gaps in our knowledge of the processes which we would like to alter.

Summary

Genetic engineering is defined as the changing of genes, using in vitro processes. 
This is contrasted with conventional breeding processes, in which genes are transferred by sexual or conjugative means. 
Since such gene transfer is a relatively random process, the breeder must select for desirable characteristics, and must rely on mutations to generate 'new' genes.
A serious limitation of this approach is that it is not possible to transfer a gene between organisms that are totally unrelated to each other.

By contrast, genetic engineering is especially useful when one wishes to introduce a gene from a higher organism into bacteria or yeast.
Such manipulations can result in the microbial synthesis of pharmacologically active polypeptides, vaccines, or enzymes for industrial use.
They can be used for the improvement of industrially important microbial cell properties, or for the genetic modification of animals.
However, in the latter case there is the major problem of modifying all cells within the organism, since animals cannot be regenerated from single, cultured cells.
Plants, on the other hand, can be more readily manipulated, and there are real prospects of introducing resistance to diseases and herbicides, increasing yield, directing the synthesis of insecticidal polypeptides, and introducing nitrogen fixation into non-leguminous crops. 

Techniques of genetic engineering 

Outline of gene cloning

Gene cloning was initially made possible by technical developments, such as the isolation of enzymes which would cut DNA at precisely defined locations (restriction endonucleases), or those which would covalently join DNA fragments (ligases), and advances still often depend on the development of new enzymes or other biochemicals. 
We are experiencing an explosion in the publication of new techniques related to cloning, and this proliferation of technical information, combined with an excess of jargon, can easily blind the novice to the basic principles of cloning.
Once these are understood, it is much easier to see where new techniques fit in to the cloning process.
The aim of this section is to outline the strategies employed for gene cloning, and to introduce those techniques which are most commonly used. 

There are several possible reasons for wishing to clone a particular piece of DNA.
One might wish to introduce into bacterial cells polypeptide, in such a way that the cells would a gene coding for a valuable produce large amounts of the polypoptide.
This is the approach which has received most publicity, resulting in the production by bacteria of such polypeptides as insulin, interferon and growth hormone.
As will be seen later, DNA can also be cloned in eukaryotic cells, with the aim either of using the cells as biochemical 'factories', or in order to modify the properties of the cells to make them better suited to our needs.
However, in practice gene cloning is carried out most often to produce enough DNA for subsequent analysis by, for example, sequencing.

Gene cloning is essentially the insertion of a specific piece of 'foreign' DNA into a cell, in such a way that the inserted DNA is replicated and handed on to daughter cells during cell division.
This process occurs naturally, as demonstrated by the rapid spread of multiple resistance to antibiotics through populations of bacteria under the appropriate selective pressure. 
However, transfer of DNA normally occurs only between closely related strains of bacteria, and there is little control over which DNA fragments are transferred.

So natural DNA transfer, o transduction, is too unpredictable and limited in range to be useful for gene cloning.

The main steps of gene cloning are summarized in xxx , and involve the following procedures:

1 Isolation of the gene (or other piece of DNA) to be cloned.

2 Insertion of the gene into another piece of DNA, called a vector, which will allow it to be taken up by bacteria and replicated within them as the cells grow and divide.
Although xxx shows the use of a plasmid vector, since this is still a widely used system, other types of vector can also be used, such as viral DNA or cosmids.

3 Transfer of the recombinant vectors into bacterial cells, either by transformation or by infection using viruses. 

4 Selection of those cells which contain the desired recombinant vectors.

5 Growth of the bacteria; this can be continued indefinitely, to give as much cloned DNA as is needed.

6 The vector, containing its inserted DNA, is normally recovered from the cells at this stage, and the insert cut out and separated from vector molecules.
However, sometimes the aim is to obtain expression of the gene within the bacterial cells, especially if the gene codes for a polypeptide which is difficult, or expensive, to prepare by other means. 


Figure 11.1

Outline of gene cloning 

Gene cloning procedures

Restriction endonucleases

At the heart of gene cloning lie the restriction endonucleases. 
These enzymes, which occur naturally in bacteria as a weapon against invading viruses, will cut both strands of DNA molecules whenever certain nucleotide sequences occur.
The class of enzymes most used for gene cloning is known as type II; each of these recognizes a particular sequence of nucleotides, usually four or six nucleotides long, and normally cuts the DNA strands within this sequence.
The cuts can be staggered, producing short single-stranded projections, or they can be opposite each other, in which case 'blunt' ends will result.
Figure 11.2 illustrates the types of sequence which can be recognized by restriction enzymes, and shows where cuts are made.
Note that those sequences which are cut internally (the majority) are symmetrical; that is, when read from 5' to 3', bath strands have the same sequence.
Staggered cuts will yield single stranded ends that are identical and complementary to each other. 
Consequently, at low temperatures there is a tendency for the single strands to associate by base-pairing, causing a reversible linking together of fragments which have been cut by the same enzyme; such fragments are said to have 'sticky' or 'cohesive' ends.
There is now a huge range of restriction endonucleases available commercially, so that blunt or sticky ends can be produced from most tetranucleotide and hexanucleotide sequences.

The isolation of genes for cloning, insertion of DNA into vectors, recovery of inserts from cloned vectors, and construction of new vectors all depend on our ability to cut DNA at well-defined sites-hence the central importance of restriction endonucleases in gene cloning.

Figure 11.2

Recognition sequences of some restriction endonucleases

Arrows indicate positions of cleavage.
Note that the cohesive ends produced by Sau3A are complementary to those produced by BamHI , yet the former recognizes a tetranucleotide sequence while the latter recognizes a hexanucleotide.

Isolation of DNA to be cloned

Depending on the aims of the experimenter, the DNA can come from a variety of sources.
Perhaps the intention is to isolate and clone a particular gene for subsequent sequencing, or for investigation of its transcriptional control.

Inevitably the gene will form only a small part of the entire genome (approximately xxx of the Escherichia coli genome and only xxx of mammalian genomes), so a way must be found to identify the gene and to 'pull it out' from the other parts of the genome either before or after cloning.
This job is made much easier if the corresponding mRNA is available in a fairly pure form.
If the protein for which it codes is a major product of the cells, then the mRNA will already be enriched for the desired species.
However, procedures such as size fractionation of mRNA, in vitro translation of the fractions, precipitation of translation products with specific antibodies, etc., will be needed for the enrichment of those mRNAs (the majority) which are less abundant.
Methods of obtaining specific mRNAs are described in Section 11.2.6, and it is worth noting that this can be the most difficult step in cloning, particularly if the gene product is not well characterized.

Such purified mRNA can be used to direct the synthesis of a complementary DNA (cDNA) strand, using the enzyme reverse transciptase (Fig. 11.3); this results in a DNA/RNA hybrid.
Affer removal of the RNA strand using alkali, the single- stranded DNA can act as a template for the synthesis of a complementary DNA strand in the presence of DNA polymerase.
One might expect the resulting double- stranded cDNA to be identical to the gene which coded for its mRNA, and this is so in the case of prokaryotic genes.
However, the majority of eukaryotic genes contain intervening sequences (introns) which interrupt their coding sequences.

The whole gene, including introns, is transcribed, the introns are cut out of the mRNA, and the remaining pieces (exons) are spliced together to give the mature mRNA which is translated, and from which cDNA is made.
Since introns are not present in functional mRNA, cDNA can be used in place of the true gene when the aim of cloning is gene expression.
Clearly, however, this approach cannot be used if one wishes to sequence the native gene, including its introns.
In the latter case, cDNA can be radioactively labelled by nick translation, and used as a hybridization probe for the identification of DNA fragments containing the gene.

Figure 11.3

Synthesis of cDNA

A procedure commonly employed when dealing with a poorly characterized genome is the formation of a 'gene library', in which the entire genome is cut randomly into large pieces, about 10 kilobases (kb) or more in size, using partial digestion with several restriction enzymes, and these pieces are all cloned, without any attempt to select for particular sequences.
When the bacteria containing these fragments are plated out to give rise to individual colonies, each colony will contain a sample of the genome, and there is a finite chance that the desired gene will be present in any one sample.
Provided enough colonies are produced, one can be almost certain that at least one will contain the gene.
The larger the genome and the smaller the average fragment size, the more colonies will have to be grown to be sure of finding any particular gene. 

Calculations show that, for 10kb fragments, about xxx colonies are needed for the E. coli genome, and nearly xxx for Homo sapiens .
In the latter case the number of colonies required is clearly unmanageable, and therefore much larger fragments, about 40 kb in size, must be cloned.
As will be described in Section 11.2.7, such large fragments need special vectors for cloning.
We shall look at methods of identifying colonies which contain specific genes later (see Section 11.2.6).

Nucleic acid chemistry has advanced so rapidly that it is now a routine procedure in many laboratories to synthesize long DNA molecules of any desired nucleotide sequence.
In fact it is possible to buy machines which will carry out each step of the synthesis automatically; all the operator does is to supply reagents and type in the sequence of nucleotides to be produced.
Consequently, if the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide is known, it may be easier to synthesize a 'gene' which codes for that sequence than to try and isolate the natural gene; such an approach was used for the bacterial synthesis of the polypeptide hormone somatostatin.

Plasmid cloning vectors

In order to clone a fragment of DNA it is not sufficient to transfer it into a bacterial cell, in the hope that it will be replicated along with the cell's own DNA.
Unless the foreign DNA contains a sequence of nucleotides which is recognized by the host bacterium as an 'origin of replication' it will not be replicated.
So it is usually necessary to attach the DNA to another fragment which contains an origin of replication. 
Such origins of replication occur naturally in plasmids, which are small, circular molecules of DNA, found in many bacteria. 
They are separate from the main chromosomal DNA, yet are replicated and usually passed on to daughter cells during cell division.
Some very important genes can be carried by these plasmids, including those for resistance to antibiotics, for toxin or antibiotic production, for nitrogen fixation, and for enzymes needed for the degradation of a large number of 'unusual' substrates such as herbicides or industrial effluents.
Only a few of these genes are resent in any one plasmid but, owing to the frequent exchange of genetic material between plasmids and chromosomal DNA, new collections of genes are continually emerging, and so help bacterial populations to respond quickly to new environmental conditions.
This can be a serious problem in hospitals if a range of antibiotics is in use, since gene transfer via plasmids can soon result in the appearance of bacteria with resistance to several different antibiotics at once.

For gene cloning, plasmids offer a convenient source of replication origins; but most of their genes are superfluous, and would make the molecules difficult to manipulate.
Therefore plasmids have been constructed from naturally occurring forms, preserving only those features which will aid cloning. 
One of the most widely used plasmids, xxx , was constructed by excising parts of naturally occurring plasmids, using restriction enzymes, and rejoining them in the correct orientations, in a series of manipulations which makes solving Rubik's cube look simple.
The resulting plasmid demonstrates many of the features which are desirable in a plasmid cloning vector (Fig. 11.4).
The molecule contains an origin of replication, which was derived from a plasmid related to the naturally occurring plasmid Col El.
This origin is particularly useful because it is 'relaxed', that is, its replication is not linked to that of the chromosomal DNA, and hence initiation of plasmid replication can be more frequent than that of the main bacterial DNA.
Consequently multiple copies of the plasmid accumulate in each cell.
This process can be taken still further if chloramphe-nicol (an inhibitor of protein synthesis) is added to the cell culture, since protein synthesis is needed for chromosomal, but not plasmid, replication.
In this way chloramphenicol can be used to 'amplify' the plasmid, resulting in up to 3000 copies per cell.

The plasmid has also been carefully constructed so that it contains unique recognition sites for 20 different restriction endonucleases.
This means that any one of the enzymes will make a single cut in the circular plasmid, generating a single, linear.

Fig. 11.,4 Map of the plasmid pBR322.
Regions coding for resistance to ampicillin (ampR) and tetracycline (tetR), and for the origin of DNA replication (ori) are indicated by solid blocks.
The cleavage sites of a selection of restriction endonucleases are indicated, some of which cut the plasmid within an antibiotic resistance gene.
Each of the enzymes shown cuts the plasmid at a unique site, and hence produces a single, linear molecule from the circular plasmid molecule to which can be attached a DNA fragment for cloning; then the molecule can be reclosed to regenerate a slightly enlarged, circular plasmid. 
It will be seen from the examples in Fig. 11.4 that the sites of restriction are distributed around the plasmid, and this allows great flexibility in the approach to selecting for recombinant molecules as described below.

Two sets of genes have been preserved in xxx ; these code for resistance to ampicillin and to tetracycline, and are very useful markers.
The presence of plasmid in a bacterium will confer resistance to these antibiotics and so such cells can be selected for by growth on medium containing either ampicillin or tetracycline.
Furthermore, because some of the restriction sites are situated on the antibiotic resistance genes, it can be arranged that insertion of foreign DNA will inactivate one or other of the genes.
For example, if the DNA is inserted at the BamHI site, the tetracycline resistance will be destroyed; so recombinant plasmids will allow cells to grow in the presence of ampicillin, but will not protect them against tetracycline.

This provides the basis for a method of discriminating between those cells which simply contain plasmid, and those which contain plasmid with a DNA insert.
Cells are plated out at low concentration onto a growth medium, solidified using agar, which contains ampicillin.
After incubation, all cells containing a plasmid will have grown to form colonies. 
It would be possible at this stage to discover which cells contained plasmids with inserts, by using cells from each colony to inoculate a fresh plate of medium containing tetracycline instead of ampicillin.
Cells which failed to grow on this plate would probably contain plasmids with inserts, and clones of these cells could then be recovered from the appropriate colony on the first plate.
In practice, the easiest way of doing this screening is by 'replica plating', in which sterile velvet pad is pressed onto the first plate of colonies, picking up some cells from each colony.
The second plate is then inoculated by being pressed against the velvet pad.
After incubation, colonies should be seen on the second plate in identical positions to those on the first plate, but there will be some gaps.
It is then quite easy to spot which colonies have not grown on tetracycline, and these can be recovered from the first plate and grown up for further characterization of the inserts contained in their plasmids.

The plasmids used as vectors for cloning have been whittled down to the smallest possible sizes.
This has been done for two reasons: first, small molecules of DNA are far less easily damaged by shearing during isolation than are large molecules. 
This increased stability allows relatively violent methods to be used for such processes as the deproteinization of plasmid preparations, and so makes it easier to obtain good yields of pure DNA.
Secondly, small molecules are more efficiently taken up by bacteria during the process of 'transformation', an important consideration when dealing with very small quantities of valuable DNA.

Plasmid size must therefore be kept to a minimum, and so it is obvious that the insertion of large fragments of DNA into a plasmid will result in a molecule which is physically unstable, and which may have an impracticably low efficiency of transformation. 
Such limitations on the maximum size of insert can cause problems, as, for example, when a gene library is being prepared from a eukaryotic organism.
In such a case, it would be necessary to produce about xxx colonies of cells to be reasonably sure that at least one would have a plasmid carrying any particular gene as its insert, assuming an average fragment size of 1O kb.
However, if fragments 40kb in size could be cloned, only xxx colonies would need to be screened. 
Although this may still seem a large number, it is not, in fact, too difficult to deal with.

Joining DNA

The process of DNA cloning depends not only on the availability of restriction enzymes and vectors, but also on our ability to join lengths of DNA together covalently.
If the DNA fragments to be joined have been cut using the same restriction enzyme, to give identical cohesive ends, they will tend to stick together if they collide, held by the hydrogen bonds between complementary base pairs.
However, this association is only temporary, owing to the weakness of the bonds and the small number of bases involved.
The linkage can be made permanent by using a 'ligase' enzyme, which will form a phosphodiester linkage between free xxx and xxx , thus joining two DNA molecules together, or circularizing a single, linear molecule. 
The main source of ligase is T4 phage, and this enzyme requires ATP to drive the ligation.
In order to stabilize the base pairing of cohesive ends, ligation is usually carried out at temperatures between 4 and xxx , with long incubation times to allow for the low rate of enzyme activity at these temperatures. 
An important feature of T4 DNA ligase is its ability to join blunt ends of DNA together, provided the concentrations of enzyme and DNA are high enough.

It will be appreciated that the process of ligation, as described above, depends on the random collisions of DNA molecules to determine which fragments are joined together.
Thus the products of a mixture of DNA fragments and linear vector will include not only vector with a single piece of inserted DNA, but also recircularized vector without any insert, lengths of DNA formed from two or more fragments, circularized fragments, two or more vector molecules linked together, etc.
By careful choice of the concentrations of vector and 'insert' DNAs, the formation of plasmid containing a single insert can be favoured, but unwanted products cannot be eliminated completely.

For some purposes this type of ligation is adequate, especially when subsequent steps will select for the 'recombinant' product. 
However, there are ways of exerting more control over the products which can be formed.
For example, if the vector is treated with alkaline phosphatase after restriction, its 5'-phosphoryl groups will be removed (Fig. 11.5).
Ligase will only join 3' and 5' ends of DNA together if the 5' end is phosphorylated; and so, on ligation with untreated DNA fragments, links can only be formed between fragment and vector or fragment and fragment, thus preventing simple recircularization of the vector and increasing the yield of recombinant molecules. 
Of course, the fragment-vector linkage can only be made through one strand of the DNA, but this is sufficient to hold the molecule together, and the 'nicks' will eventually be repaired by bacterial host cells after transformation.

Ideally, both vector and 'insert' DNA should be cut with the same restriction enzyme, or with a pair which generate identical protruding ends (isoschizomers), but this is not always possible. 
In such cases, any cohesive ends can be converted to the blunt form, either by removing protruding nucleotides using Sl nuclease (which degrades single stranded DNA), or by filling in the single- stranded ends using DNA polymerase and all four nucleoside triphosphates.
In principle, the blunt-ended molecules could then be linked using T4 DNA ligase.

However, this is not usually done, since the resulting recombinant molecules would probably not contain sites for restriction at the points where the links have been made, and so it would be difficult to recover the inserted DNA from the vector after cloning.
Consequently, it is far more useful to carry out blunt ended ligation between DNA fragments and 'linkers', which are chemically synthesized oligonucleotides containing one or more restriction sites (Fig.

11.6).
If the vector contains, for example, a HindlII cleavage site in one of its antibiotic resistance genes, then the DNA fragments, after conversion to blunt-ended forms, would be ligated to linkers containing a HindIII site. 
Subsequent restriction of the fragments-plus-linkers using HindIII would generate molecules which could be ligated to the vector.
There are so many linkers (and related molecules known as adaptors) commercially available that it is now possible to overcome almost all problems of incompatibility between vector and insert.

Figure 11.5

Use of alkaline phosphatase to increase yield of recombinant molecules

A technique known as 'homopolymer tailing' can be used to join blunt-ended molecules, and has the advantage that only intermolecular bonds, between vector and insert, can occur.
Vector and insert are treated separately with terminal transferase and either dATP or TTP, so that poly dA tails are built up on the 3'-termini of one and poly T tails on the other. 
On mixing, the complementary tails will result in stable, hybrid molecules which can be used for transformation.
The disadvantage of this method is that it does not automatically create restriction sites on either side of the inserted DNA, and so recovery of inserts may be difficult.
When dGTP and dCTP are used similarly with molecules which have been cut with the restriction enzyme PstI , a PstI cleavage site will be regenerated on ligation, and can be used to recover insert from the plasmid after cloning. 

Figure 11.6

Use of linkers to join blunt-ended molecules

Transformation and growth of cells

Before the recombinant DNA can be bulked up by cloning it must be taken up by a suitable bacterial host cell, which is then said to be 'transformed', and which is usually a strain of E. coli lacking the restriction system which would normally degrade foreign DNA.
Untreated cells will not take up DNA to any significant extent, and so they must be pretreated to make them 'competent'.
This pretreatment usually involves incubation of exponentially growing cells with xxx at low temperatures, after which the DNA is added, a mild heat shock then results in uptake of the DNA. 
The efficiency of transformation is never high, and is influenced by the cell strain and the size and form of the DNA. 
Between 105 and 10' transformants can be obtained per microgram xxx of supercoiled xxx , but this rate drops to less than xxx of religated plasmid, and decreases progressively as the size of inserted DNA increases.
Linear DNA is almost completely ineffective in transformation.
Even at its most efficient, transformation takes place with only about xxx of the DNA molecules.

Since the process favours small molecules, it can present a problem when attempts are made to clone large fragments of DNA inserted in plasmids, and steps should be taken to prevent the recircularization of non-recombinant plasmid, using alkaline phosphatase.

The selection of transformed cells usually depends on their resistance to an antibiotic, and so it is important to incubate the cells in a medium without antibiotic for about an hour, to allow the plasmid antibiotic resistance genes to be expressed. 
The cells can then be plated out on a solid medium containing antibiotic, for selection of colonies containing recombinant DNA, as described in Section 11.2.3.
Methods for the selection of specific colonies will be described below.
Sometimes the aim is to clone a single species of plasmid (recombinant or otherwise) which has already been purified, and in this case there is no need to plate out the transformed cells prior to growth in a selective medium.
See Chapters 6 and 7 for further information about transformation and bacterial cell growth. 

Achievements of and prospects for generic engineering

Achievements

What are the achievements of genetic engineering in the area of biotechnology?
So far very few genetically engineered products have gone into production commercially, although many have reached the pilot plant stage, or are in clinical trials. 
Genetically engineered bacteria have been used for the production of single cell protein for several years. 'Human' insulin made by bacteria is available, but faces tough competition from chemically modified pig insulin.
The only vaccines so far available commercially are for use on livestock, where there is a large demand.
Such vaccines cannot offer the prolonged protection which is given by attenuated, live bacteria, but they are safer to use.
These few products, however successful, cannot possibly generate enough profit to cover the vast amount of money which has already been invested in the development of genetic engineering, and it is certain that investors will have to wait for a few more years before seeing a worthwhile profit.
Already a few firms have found themselves in financial trouble because of a lack of appreciation of the time needed to overcome the formidable problems associated with the development, production and testing of a new product.
The United States and Japan have shown by far the greatest commitment to gene tic manipulation , and they can be expected to start reaping the very considerable rewards of their foresight within the next few years.
In fact it is expected that $40 billion of sales worldwide will be attributable to genetic engineering by the year 2000, so there is every incentive for investing in research now.

The projects which are likely to have both commercial and social benefits in the near future include the production of human blood clotting factor VIII, interferons, tumour necrosis factor, lymphotoxin, and vaccines against herpes simplex, hepatitis B and other human viruses.
Bacteria will be available to degrade pollutants such as 2,4,5-T or xxx , or to product surfactants, emulsifiers and other specialized molecules.
All these projects have been successful on a laboratory scale, and must now be scaled up.

Problems

Expression and plasmid stability

Genetic engineering has reached the stage where it is relatively straightforward to isolate and clone the gene for any protein which has been well characterized.
The time-consuming problems arise after the cloning stage.
To begin with there is the need to obtain high levels of expression of the gene in a foreign host, ideally under some form of control, so that expression can be delayed until the host cells have been able to grow to a high cell density.
The protein product of the gene might not be stable within the host cell, so it may be necessary to use a hybrid gene as a way of 'tagging' the protein with a protective polypeptide; alternatively, the genome of the host cell could be modified to prevent degradation of foreign proteins.
If the foreign gene is on a plasmid, steps must be taken to ensure that the plasmid is maintained in the cell culture.
When the foreign gene endows the host cell with an increased efficiency of growth, as in the case of the glutamate dehydrogenase gene transferred to M. methylotrophus , plasmid stability is automatically ensured; but, in the majority of cases, another gene must be included in the plasmid which will apply a selective pressure in favour of plasmid-containing cells.

Product recovery

Even when expression of a gene on a stable plasmid has been achieved our worries are not over.
Ease of recovery of a product may be a major factor in determining whether a process can be profitable.
If the product remains within the bacterial cells, the cells must be harvested, broken open, and the debris separated from product.
On the other hand, if the cells can be persuaded to secrete the product, its recovery becomes much simpler, with the bonus that cells are not destroyed during the process.
Eukaryotic cells will secrete protein with a suitable signal sequence at its N-terminus, removing the signal sequence as the protein leaves the cell, but prokaryotes are generally less able to secrete proteins.
However, Bacillus subtilis is known to secrete more than 50 proteins, and it is therefore often used in preference to E. coli when secretion is important.
The problems of recovering enzymes from cultured cells are discussed in detail in Chapter 13.

Safety

Another factor which must be considered carefully is the safety of any genetically engineered system.
When cloning began in the mid-1970s there seemed to be a real possibility that harmful genes (such as those coding for tumour formation, or for a toxin) could be inadvertently transferred to bacteria which would survive outside the laboratory, and which might then spread amongst the population.
Strict guidelines were drawn up by the National Institutes of Health in the United States and by the Genetic Manipulation Advisory Group in the United Kingdom, effectively banning the cloning of viral DNA or DNA from tumours, and specifying high levels of physical containment for most other cloning experiments.
Fortunately, 'safe' host cells were developed, such as 1776, which had such specific nutrient requirements, weak cell walls, high sensitivity to bile salts, etc., that they were highly unlikely to survive outside the laboratory.
At the same time, plasmids were constructed which lacked the tra genes necessary for transfer of the plasmid from one cell to another by conjugation, thus reducing the danger of transfer of a dangerous plasmid from a safe host to an infective one.

In order for a cloned gene to become harmful, all the following must occur.
The gene must be transferred to an infective host.
The new host must escape from containment and cause infection.
The cloned gene must be expressed by thc host, and the product must be able to move from the bacterial cell into the infected person, where it might cause damage if it reaches a particular location.
Since the overall probability of such an incident is the product of the probabilities of each stop, the risks start to look fairly insignificant, provided that disabled hosts and plasmids are used, with reasonably strict levels of physical containment.
In recognition of this, the guidelines have been progressively relaxed, and the only serious restrictions which remain relate to the release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment, as might be needed for the microbiological degradation of pollutants, or for microbially enhanced oil recovery.
Work with pathogens must still, of course, be carried out under strictly regulated conditions of containment.

Economics

There is no guarantee that a product will be profitable just because it is made by genetically engineered organisms. 
If the market is very limited there is no possibility of making a profit, unless the customers are all oil sheiks. 
Such an argument could apply to human growth hormone, since there are relatively few cases of dwarfism worldwide, and therefore insufficient potential revenue to cover development and production costs.
However, if it is found that the hormone is also effective in treating burns and in promoting healing, then the market will be vast, and production of the hormone should be most profitable, particularly since demand would then far outstrip the supplies available from cadavers. 
This single example should make it clear that much of the investment in genetic engineering must be speculative, except where there is an obvious demand for, and no satisfactory alternative source of, a product.
Even in such cases there can be some horrible pitfalls, among which is the problem of adequate patent protection for any new recombinant DNA.
Although it is possible to patent an organism or a plasmid, it is not yet clear how much protection is given against the creation of cells or plasmids which do the same job but in a subtly different way; for example, some of the bases in a gene can be altered without changing the protein for which it codes.

The need for basic research

One of the main obstacles in the way of the genetic engineer has nothing to do with gene manipulation; it is the fact that we are still depressingly ignorant about many of the basic principles underlying the features we would like to modify.
Until we have a thorough understanding of the biochemistry determining disease resistance, growth rates, morphology, photosynthetic yield, etc., it will be difficult to manipulate such characteristics by genetic engineering.

The future

In this book, genetic manipulation has been discussed only in relation to its direct application to biotechnology; however, it should not be forgotten that a principal application of these techniques is to the investigation of gene structure and function. 
Such basic studies will inevitably have a great influence on biotechnology, with respect both to what is cloned and how it is cloned.
We can expect to learn a lot more about the factors involved in regulating gene expression, and should be able to make use of this knowledge in the optimization of expression of foreign genes.
A full understanding of the mechanisms of secretion and post-translational modifications will help in the efficient production of fully active and stable polypeptides.

What developments can we hope to see over the next ten years?
Life would be very dull without surprises, and there is no reason to think that genetic engineering will fail to present us with some.
However, on thc basis of the work currently being carried out, it is possible to make some guesses about which general areas are likely to produce results. 

Pharmacology

Cloning will produce enough material to allow full clinical trials of those polypeptides, such as interferons, enkephalins, cytokines, etc., which are naturally produced at a low level within the body, and which probably act as 'biological response modifiers'.
If these could be used as 'natural' drugs, a whole new area of pharmacology could be opened up.
The number of vaccines produced by genetic engineering seems certain to increase, and should include several for use in humans; there are hopes for vaccines against malaria and AIDS.

Industrial enzymes

As the industrial use of enzymes becomes more important (see Chapter 14) we can expect that they will be produced by genetically engineered micro-organisms.
Each gene will probably be altered by in vitro mutagenesis to give an enzyme which is modified to improve its stability, its kinetics, and perhaps to suit it to being immobilized for most efficient use on an industrial scale.
Such 'protein engineering' is likely to be of immense importance to the development of enzyme technology, and is entirely dependent on the techniques of genetic engineering.
One project which is already making significant progress is the production of ligninases, which could make available a vast new source of chemical feedstock, based on the degradation of woody waste.
For further discussion of the potential uses of enzymes produced by genetic engineering see Chapter 15.

Breeding

At the level of whole organisms, we can look forward to some significant improvements in the quality of crops, in terms of decreased need for fertilizer and pesticides, improved disease resistance, increased yield, and improved quality of plant proteins. 
Similar improvements in the quality of livestock may be possible.
There are already reports of the synthesis of navel compounds by bacteria, as a result of the creation of new metabolic pathways.
For example, novel 'hybrid' antibiotics have been synthesized by Streptomyces as a result of bringing together in one organism the biosynthetic genes from strains which produce different antibiotics.

Alternatives

It has been argued that the production of polypeptides by genetic engineering will be of only transient importance, since advances in our understanding of receptor-effector interactions may allow the design of small molecules which will be as effective as large polypeptides, yet which can be synthesized chemically. 
It is true that short polypeptides between about 8 and 20 residues in length have been found to be more effective than whole viral proteins in eliciting the production of antibodies to foot and mouth disease virus or poliovirus, and many bioactive polypeptides are very short (for example, calcitonin 32 residues, endorphins 31, enkephalins 5).
Chemical synthesis offers the possibility of modifying some residues, for example by using D-amino acids, so that the polypeptide will not be degraded within the gut, thus allowing oral administration of drugs which would otherwise have to be taken intravenously.
The choice between biological and chemical synthesis will be influenced by such factors as technological advances in large-scale polypeptide synthesis, the costs of raw materials, the degree of purity required, etc., and it is impossible to predict how long it will be before drugs can be rationally designed to suit the receptors to which they bind.
It is likely that genetic engineering will be used for the production of polypeptides for many years to come, and for enzyme production it will remain the only feasible method for the foreseeable future.
Genetic engineering is already becoming a tool of the breeders, and its importance in this area is certain to increase.

Summary

A survey of achievements includes the biosynthesis of insulin, vaccines, blood clotting factors, antiviral and anticancer factors. 

The main problems which remain to be solved are: efficient and controlled expression of cloned genes; plasmid stability; recovery of product.

The new technology presents some potential risks.
Consequently, guidelines have been drawn up, and 'safe' host cells and vectors have been developed.

Economics will inevitably determine the future of genetic engineering, and there must be sufficient demand for a product to justify the high investment needed to bring it to the market. 
It is not yet clear how effectively a genetically engineered product can be protected by patents.

A brief survey of potential products from genetic engineering includes 'biological response modifiers', vaccines, enzymes for industrial use, improved crops and livestock, production of novel compounds by bacteria.
However, it has been suggested that the chemical synthesis of oligonucleotides may challenge their production by genetic engineering.
