
Producing and Consuming in an Environmentally Friendly Way 

There are two sides to the ecological product at present.
For the consumer it is a sign of his concern for the serious harm mankind is inflicting on the environment; for the manufacturer it is an excellent excuse to carry out highly profitable marketing operations.
Viewed from either of these perspectives, the ecological product is still at a very embryonic stage.
However,from the point of view of both manufacturer and the consumer, advances have been made which reflect future tendencies and represent a radical change in the current form of production and consumption.

Awareness grows daily of the impossibility of continuing to consume energy resources at the rate which has developed in this century.
Thus, from 1900 until now the annual flow of goods and services-the so-called gross world product-has grown thirtyfold.
This means that the injection of energy into the system has grown fifteenfold, that of mineral raw materials thirteenfold, and that of atmospheric emissions of carbon dioxide twelvefold.
Every citizen of the developed world consumes 80 times more resources than a citizen of a developing country.

In this clearly unsustainable scenario the ecological product seeks to provide a new form of production and consumption.
It means introducing a process of selection from the moment the raw material is chosen, the way it is transformed and elaborated, its methods and routes of distribution, its presentation on the market and what the consumer does with it.
This concept naturally takes account of the final destiny of each of the materials employed, whether by recycling them or producing the least possible impact on the environment when they are disposed of.

Many countries have begun to look into the question of the ecological product.
The European Community has issued a series of directives to standardise the criteria for what is or is not an ecological product, but the different economic and political situations of the member states pose enormous problems for the Community initiative.
Thus, the degrees of awareness of the consumers, i.e., the pressure from the world of demand, differs among the countries of the Community, and the response of industry and the authorities therefore differs as well.
As Ana Beltrán points out in the article "The Ecological Product in the European Community", countries such as Germany and France have already made progress in the legal definition of the ecological product in eco- labeling.
In both cases, the criteria employed reflect more their national particularities than a Community will to advance in the same direction.
However, the common objective will finally be imposed by the imperative of the free circulation of products in the European area.
In order to achieve this it will be necessary to establish clear categories for the products affected by the ecological definition, the content of this definition and how it will be reflected in the ecological label.
All these aspects are still a controversial issue in which the industrial, political and commercial interests of each country represent a basic factor.
Ana Beltrán states that the ecological audit, on which there is still no Community legislation, could be the levelling instruments with which to measure the ecological criteria of production and consumption in Europe.
In Spain, in particular, such initiatives have only just begun to arise.
The author points out the example of the Environmental Quality Council, a body belonging to the Department of the Environment of the Generalitat of Catalonia, formed by representatives of industry, commerce, the trade unions and consumer and ecological organisations, the aim of which is to provide information on the eco-labeling of non-alimentary products.

In order for this to become a reality, the consumer must adopt a role very different to the one played until now in the market.
If it is recognised that the Western model of development is characterised by an over-production which requires an over-consumption to sustain it, the consumer has a large part of the responsibility for the way this process develops.
Jordi Bigas, in his article on "The Participation of the Consumers" argues that in order to attain an ecologically sustainable society it is necessary to substantially modify the lifestyles of the developed countries.
A key aspect of this new pattern of behaviour would be to consume in a different manner.
From this perspective, Bigas confers great importance on the role of social organisations which adopt a critical attitude towards the current model of economic development.
However, his call for more power for these civic organisations is not just an ideal since he situates them in their correct field of battle: against the transnational companies.
The author alerts us to the way these corporations are redesigning their strategies in order to incorporate "green criteria" into their production and marketing strategies.
However, there is an insurmountable contradiction between the organisational and economic structure of companies and the rational employment of resources for the safeguard of the environment.
This structure makes it impossible for the producer or consumer to control the product at any of its stages.
This contradiction reveals the dimensions of the challenge which consumer organisations will have to face if they wish to impose ecological criteria on consumption and, through this policy, bring about changes in the lifestyle of the industrialised countries.

The question consists, as Ricardo Almenar Ansensio points out in his article "Towards a sustainable society", of whether it is possible to reduce the flows of resource towards products and, in consequence, the volume of wastes generated at the end of their useful lives.
His reply to this question is affirmative as long as certain requirements are fulfilled: products must be more durable, use less materials, have components which raise their recyclability and, finally, require less energy.
To bring all these factors into play does not appear easy, although it is essential if we wish to reach a minimal common denominator in the definition of what is an ecological product.
Almenar points out in this connection that the ecoproduct must become the instrument that allows us to reduce the pressure of mankind on the environment.
Such an objective would involve a deep restructuring of industry where the use of resources would be considered in terms of impact on the environment rather than mere profitability.

As indicated at the beginning, there are already various examples in Europe of ecoproducts which, with varied success, point the way towards a sustainable economy.
Rudolf Schwarz, the head of marketing for the German office furniture company Wilkhahn explains how "eco-control" was defined in a participative manner by managers, technicians and workers in order to market products which included ecological elements from their conception until the end of their useful life.
Academics and institutions contributed significant help in the development of this concept, for it was to embrace the whole company and not just certain of its parts.
The author defines "eco-control" as a working tool which allows ecological criteria to be included in the company's planning, decisions and developments.
It is a sort of "chronic environmental audit" which filters into each of the processed, beginning with the selection of natural raw materials with which the products are made.

The example may help to clarify one of the possible forms the ecoproduct could take in the future.
However, its success from the point of view of preserving the environment and a fairer sharing out of the use of the planetïs resources does not depend on the efficiency with which it is developed by a few -or many- companies, but on making it the cornerstone of the economic processed in the developed countries.
In this sense the ecological product can only be the sole natural child of an economy which propitiates a sustainable relationship with the environment and subordinates criteria of growth or development.

A paradigmatic and successful example of an ecological company is that of The Body Shop.
This company dealing in natural products for health and women's body care, which is quoted on the London Stock Exchange, has reaped great success all over the world from its production criteria in harmony with the environment.
In an interview with this publication, Anita Roddick, the driving force behind this project, explains the company's story, its particular concept of business and the manner in which The Body Shop carries out the entire manufacturing process of its products.
This experience, which has come as a shock to businessmen of the old school, reveals that ecological products can be made with great success applying new concepts.

Finally, Ignasi Doñate, the legal expert on the environment, details the legislation on eco-labeling at European and national level.
This issue ends with Current News, which deals with the population conference in Geneva, and Ecology of Leisure, which reviews some important recent publications.

The Ecological Product in the European Community 

The article examines the philosophy of the European Community on the ecological product and the different policies and initiatives of the member states.
In the promotion of the manufacture of cleaner products it is necessary to distinguish between the obligatory measures, of a more general character, where the firm measures in Germany stand out, and the voluntary measures, which include the promotion of eco- labeling and environmental auditing.

Practically all consumer products have a negative impact on the environment.
From the raw materials used in their manufacture, through the processes of manufacturing and distribution, to their use and elimination, products contribute to the pollution of the air, soil and water.

During their manufacturing stage, use is made of finite energy and raw materials.
If the use of energy and natural resources is not rationalised we could find ourselves with big problems in supply and the maintenance of ecological equilibrium.
For example, there is an obvious need to redress the demand for water or to prevent the uncontrolled falling of trees for the production of timber or paper.

Furthermore, industrial plants produce a level of noise which represents a serious health risk.
In the same way, in the production stage, chemical substances or products are used which cause a great deal of pollution, especially through atmospheric emissions and the wastes discharged into the waters.
We can cite as examples the nitrates used in agriculture, the phosphates present in detergents or the emissions from the solvents in paint production.

During the stages of distribution, consumption and elimination there is also a great deal of serious damage to the environment.

During their use, products consume a great deal of energy (for example, the electricity consumed by household electrical products), or else contain substances that are harmful to the environment while the product is used ( for example, the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in fridges and aerosols).
Practically all products are packaged for distribution.
Packaging is very important because it protects the product against deterioration, guarantees hygiene, makes it possible to give information to the consumer and facilitates the transport and storage of the products.
However, the production, use and elimination of packaging materials (whether glass, plastic, aluminium, paper or cardboard) can worsen many ecological problems.
The main problem they pose is the enormous quantity of waste they generate.
If they are not reused or recycled for another use, packagings are dumped with the rest of the rubbish or incinerated, leading to harmful consequences for the environment.

The economic development of the present century has given rise to higher production and fostering of consumption leading to increasingly serious threats to the environment from the manufacture of products.

Particularly serious ecological problems include: 

The increase of the greenhouse effect.
This phenomenon arises because emissions of certain gases into the atmosphere impede the escape of thermic radiation thereby causing the planet to become warmer.
The principal agents causing the greenhouse effect are carbondioxide (CO), the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), nitrogen oxide (NO) and methane (CH).

The level of CO2 has increased due to the burning of fossil fuels (energy, transport and industrial sectors) and deforestation.
The increase in the volume of CFCs is totally due to industrial production.
The emissions of methane come from the agricultural sector (cattle-breeding and certain crops), the energy sector (escapes of natural gas) and dump sites.

The thinning of the ozone layer.
CFCs, HCFCs and halons are the cause of the destruction of the ozone layer, their molecules decomposing and causing a reaction which opens up a hole in the ozone layer protecting the earth.
Ultraviolet rays from the sun reach the surface of the earth through this hole, causing damage to human health, aquatic ecosystems, agriculture and certain materials.

The above-mentioned gases are used basically in aerosols, in the insulation of plastic foam boxes and in the compressors of refrigeration systems.

The acidification of the atmosphere.

Acidification is due to a considerable extent to the burning of fossil fuels and has harmful effects on forest ecosystems, lakes, subterranean and surface waters and the soil.
The substances most directly responsible for acidification are sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxide (NO2).

Deforestation.
The forests are important for many reasons.
They protect the earth against erosion, impede desertification, convert carbon dioxide into oxygen and help to maintain and improve the fertility of the soil.

In addition, wood is used as a raw material in industry and also as a source of energy.
Despite this, forests are disappearing in many parts of the world due to excessive exploitation and bad management.

The provision of energy and water resources.
The challenge currently facing the world is to make economic growth compatible with an efficient and safe supply of energy and a clean environment.
It is necessary to increase energy performance and develop cleaner technologies.
It is also indispensable to have enough water of the right quality, not allowing it to be polluted and rationalising its use and consumption.

Waste management.
Wastes constitute a problem for two reasons: their toxicology has a notable effect on the ecosystems and their low biodegradability means that they remain in the environMent for a long time before decomposing and being incorporated into the food chain.

The problem of the generation of wastes is one of the most serious currently facing the industrialised countries.
The establishment of suitable waste management policies is equally urgent in order to establish a controlled volume of rubbish and promote the reuse and recycling of wastes or clean and safe methods of elimination.

Industrial accidents and hazards.
Industrial activities also present many risks, both from general industrial activities and from chemical products and the techniques of genetic engineering and biotechnology.

Safety measures must therefore be taken in order to avoid accidents or to take rapid action when they occur.

Measures to promote the manufacture of cleaner products 

The ecological problems posed by products bring about the need to adopt pollution preventing measures aimed at promoting the manufacture of cleaner products, i.e., products which cause the least possible damage to the environment.

The member states of the European CoMMunity and the rest of the world have for some time been taking Measures within the framework of their environMental policies which directly or indirectly promote more ecological production, but over the course of the last few years actions have been intensified and new instruments have appeared.
Many of these measures are obligatory, prohibitive or involve penalties.
Other more recent ones are of a voluntary nature, providing incentives for companies.
We will run through the provisions adopted by the European Community, making special reference to the Community system for awarding eco-labels.

Obligatory measures 

Since the Community's environmental policy was initiated twenty years ago, its activities in this area have consisted of legal measures in the form of regulations and directives.
The Community possesses a broad legal framework which affects companies basically in the following fields: 

Pollution of waters.
The objectives of the Community directives are aimed at establishing minimal standards of quality for water according to use and to impeding the discharge of hazardous substances into natural aquatic environments.
The application of this norm in the member states obliges industries to change their production methods or adequately treat their waste waters before discharging them.

Atmospheric pollution.
The Community legislation consists mainly of air quality standards, product quality standards (for example the maximum sulphur content in diesel oils or lead content in petrol), standards directed at decreasing harmful emissions from vehicles and a system of authorisations for certain new industrial plants.
The Community has likewise undertaken to establish emissions of CO2 at 1990 levels in the year 2000 and has established that CFCs must be progressively eliminated by January 1 1996.

These regulations mean that companies have to develop to apply technical solutions to the problems caused by the emissions they generate, which means they must make big efforts to adapt.
For example the Community decision to eliminate CFCs constitutes a true industrial and technological challenge.
Industrialists have to find ways to reduce CFCs: using substitutes, researching new procedures, etc. 

Chemical products.
The production and distribution of chemical products are the object of special vigilance in the European Community.
There are regulations to reduce industrial hazards.
In addition, the marketing, classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous substances are highly regulated.

Waste management.
It is calculated that 2000 million tonnes of wastes are produced every year in the European Community, of which 150 million are industrial, 30 million of the latter can he classified as toxic and hazardous.
While waste management is a Local responsibility, the Community has judged an overall Community waste management policy necessary due to the interdependence of wastes with industrial and commercial activities.
The Community strategy is aimed primarily at promoting recycling and reusing and finally towards optimising the methods for the definitive elimination of wastes not reused.
It has thus embarked and continues to work on the establishment of a coherent set of regulations establishing the general framework of action for the member states in the field of waste treatment.

We should point out the proposal for directive adopted recently by the Commission on packaging and waste from packaging (1).
This proposal is aimed at contributing to the realisation of the internal market, doing away commercial obstacles and guaranteeing the protection of the environment, given that the existence of divergent legislation by the states in this field poses difficulties for the realisation of the internal market and involves different levels of protection for the environment.

Some member states of the Community have already adopted measures on packaging and waste from packaging, basically through the establishment of shared responsibility between manufacturers, users and distributors, along with political authorities and consumers.
In many cases agreements have been reached between the different sectors in order to reduce and recycle packaging.
In Spain proposals have been made to this effect.

The strictest system is the German one.
In 1991 the German government adopted a decree which obliged the manufacturers and distributors to recover packaging in order to reuse or recycle it independently of the public system of waste elimination.
Collection, classification and recycling objectives to be attained were fixed in given quantities according to the raw material of the packaging.
In order to enter this system the packaging has to carry a "green point", a symbol reminding the consumer to return it to the collection system.

The objectives of the German legislation are far more exigent than those of the Community proposal we will examine below.
In addition, the need to identify packagings with the "green point" so that they can be collected in Germany is causing problems for companies which export to the country.

The Community proposal requires the member states to adopt the measures necessary to anticipate the production of wastes from packaging and to guarantee the establishment of channels for its reuse or recycling.
The objectives to be attained have been fixed in definite terms.
The final objective is that in the year 2000 no packaging should be put on the market for which a channel of reuse or recycling has not been established.
This includes a series of informative measures via a harmonised system of labeling: all the packagings must carry labels indicating the nature of the material used in the packaging, whether it is recyclable or reusable and informing the consumer what must be done in order to facilitate recollection and classification.

Voluntary measures 

Important steps forward in the protection of the environment have been achieved with this series of legislative measures.
However, the obligatory measures have not been enough to bring about substantial changes in current tendencies and practices by producers or consumers.
Instruments are necessary which will progressively spur on ecological production until the point at which concern tor the environment is present in all the processes of production and the practices of the consumers.

The Fifth Community environmental action programme recently adopted by the Council falls within this line.
The programme is not obligatory but outlines the strategy and objectives of the Community and its member states in the field of the environment from now until the year 2000.

It fixes a series of objectives that the Community must achieve in different areas of environmental problems.
Although it considers the continued adoption of legislative measures necessary, it proposes the use of other instruments allowing all sectors of society (producers, public authorities, consumers) to fully share responsibilities in the field of the environment.

Market instruments: consideration of the environmental costs in company accounts, fiscal incentives, state aids to stimulate investments in ecological technology and clean production processes, promotion of environmental auditing.

Horizontal support instruments: to improve basic information and statistics; to encourage research and technological development in less pollutive technologies and recycling techniques; to promote correct sectorial and spatial planning; to broaden and improve education and information to the public (for example via ecological labeling) and professional training and continuous education in the field of the environment; mechanisms of financial assistance, such as the structural funds, the financial instrument for the environment (LIFE), which finances demonstration projects, the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the future cohesion funds.
We will now look at two recent instruments of a voluntary character adopted by the European Community to stimulate more ecological production.

Eco-labeling.
The seriousness of environmental problems has meant that consumers have become highly aware of these issues in recent years and manifest a growing interest in ecological products.
For companies, the behaviour of consumers is a determining factor in their sales and marketing strategies.
According to the surveys, a great number of consumers are prepared to pay more for a cleaner environment.
This tendency can be seen in the wide range of products on the market which incorporate different signs indicating their compatibility with the environment (products without CFC, biodegradable products, ecological paper, etc.).
If an increasing number Of Green products are appearing it is because people buy them and the posture of the consumer therefore becomes an important incentive for ecological manufacturing.

However, what most interests the consumer who wishes to protect the environment is adequate information on the most important ecological issues and the environmental efficiency of the products.
Consumers are often unaware of the significance of the indications on products (for example the significance of biodegradable) and overwhelmed by different types of labels and signs.

Clear, reliable information which does not generate any confusion is necessary.

In this context of improving information and stimulating the manufacture of products less harmful to the environment come the programmes for awarding ecological labels which have appeared in different parts of the world, as they are doing now in Canada and Japan.

These programmes are normally promoted by the public authorities and consist of awarding an ecological label to those products which minimise their negative impact on the environment.

The first country in Europe to introduce a programme of awarding ecological labels was Germany.

Since 1978 this country has run the Blue Angel Plan which has awarded the label to 3,500 products.
The German system therefore already has significant experience.
The German Environmental Agency gives administrative and scientific support to the Blue Angel Plan, but the decisions for awarding the labels are taken by an independent jury.

France has also recently adopted a system of eco-labeling, the management of which has been delegated to AFNOR, the French institute for standardisation, which awards the NF-Envrironnement label.
Other countries in the European Community are also considering the development of eco-labels, but are probably waiting until the Community system is developed in order to use it as reference.

All eco-labeling programmes are characterised by the need to initially define the categories of products.

A jury or committee must decide on the different categories of production to which the system can be applied.
Ecological criteria for the awarding of the label must then be fixed for each category of product.

These criteria are based on an overall assessment of the product's environmental impact, i.e., it is necessary to observe more favourable treatment of the environment at all stages of the product's life cycle.
However, it must be borne in mind that due to the difficulty of measuring the ecological impact of products at all stages, priority will always be given in the criteria to the most serious or sensitive environmental problems posed which also serve to distinguish between products.

For example, as concerns toilet paper, the Blue Angel Programme registers the recycled paper content without concentrating on other characteristics of the product.
Another example is constituted by lawn mowers and vacuum cleaners.
The criterion considered is noise emission, while energy consumption is not considered.

These questions have generated criticisms that these programmes can give certain products preference over others which are also friendly to the environment thereby distorting competition, can put the brake on new technological advances and can give priority to lower quality or less efficient products.

The existence of different national plans for eco-labeling may cause a fragmentation of the single market, create distortions in competition and confusion for the consumers.
With the intention of achieving the creation in the future of a single and effective eco-label for the entire EC, the latter has adopted a Community system of awarding eco-labels (2).

The objective of this system is to stimulate the industrial sectors and companies to manufacture products less harmful to the environment and to give more information to consumers on the ecological repercussions of products, in order to stimulate them to acquire the ones which carry the label.
This is a voluntary scheme which will be introduced gradually.
It is hoped that the system will be first applied to detergents, paints, paper, washing machines, dishwashers, batteries, textiles and cosmetic products.
Foodstuffs, drinks, pharmaceutical products and preparations classified as hazardous are excluded from their field of application.

The ecological label is awarded to products which fulfill the overall requirements established by Community legislation in the fields of health, safety and the environment and which have been manufactured in accordance with a series of ecological criteria fixed at Community level.
The ecological criteria are established for each category of products defined in order to guarantee that competing products which are used for the same purposes and which have equivalent uses figure in the same category.

The criteria for each group of products are defined on the basis of the product's environmental impact over its whole Life cycle (from the cradle to the grave).
This means that the entire Life cycle of the product is analysed, beginning with the extraction of raw materials, continuing through the stages of production, distribution and use, until its management as waste.

The proposals for the definition of product groups and the ecological criteria are made by the European Commission on its own initiative or at the request of the competent bodies of each state.
Interest groups must be consulted during the preparation stage by the competent national bodies.

In order to put these proposals into action, the Commission must consult the principal interest groups meeting in a Consultation Forum.
The forum is formed by representatives at Community level from industry, commerce, trade unions, and consumer and ecological organisations.

When the forum has given its opinion, the Commission submits the proposal and the forum's comments to a committee formed by representatives of the member states presided over by a representative of the Commission.
The Committee is in favour of the proposal, the Commission adopts and publishes it.
If the Committee is not in favour, the proposal is submitted to the Council of the European Communities.

Community manufacturers or importers who wish to obtain the eco-label must make a request to one of the competent bodies designated by the member state in which the product is manufactured, put on the market for the first time or imported from a third country.

The competent body decides on the award of the label.
If it decides to award it, it must notify the Commission, which informs the competent bodies of other member states.
If after 30 days from the notification to the Commission there have been no objections, the competent body can award the label.
If objections are formulated which cannot be resolved informally within 45 days of the notification, the Commission must submit the proposal to the above mentioned Committee.

The logo which products awarded the Community eco-label may carry consists of a flower formed by an "E" surrounded by the twelve stars of the Community on a green shoot.

Great efforts are currently being made to define the categories of products and the ecological criteria.

Different working parties constituted by representatives of the member states, the interest groups and the European Commission are working on this.
Certain member states are working as head of a group of products.
Thus, Denmark is leading textiles and paper, Germany detergents and other cleansing products, France paints, varnishes, batteries and shampoos, Italy packagings, ceramics, fridges and freezers, and Great Britain washing machines, dishwashers, light bulbs, lacquers, hair gels and deodorants.

Parallel discussions on organisational questions, contracts and charges are going on between the Commission, the member states and interest groups in order to establish clear bases for action for the competent bodies.

The member states must give notification of the competent body or bodies for the awarding of ecolabels before the end of October 1992.
Denmark, Germany, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Great Britain have done so.
Spain has still not done so.
The Department of the Environment of the Generalitat of Catalonia has promulgated a Decree creating the competent bodies in Catalonia (3).

In accordance with the decree, the competent body for the awarding of eco-labels will be the General Directorate of Environmental Quality of the Department of the Environment.
This Directorate will be responsible for receiving applications.
A commission or technical committee assigned by the Directorate will evaluate the ecological properties of the product.
In the same manner, an Environmental Quality Council will be formed, with the principal task of producing a binding report on the applications for eco-labels.
The Council will be formed by representatives of the Department of the Environment, the industrial sector and commerce, the biggest trade unions in Catalonia, consumer and ecological organisations, the Catalan Institute of Consumption and the General Laboratory for Testing and Research of Catalonia.

Environmental auditing.
Another instrument of a voluntary nature representing a step forward in the improvement of industry's treatment of the environment will be environmental auditing.

Environmental audits do not evaluate the product's effect on the environment but that of the company's entire productive process.
Ecological audits allow companies to define an environmental policy and test its correct application.
They could become a very important factor in company strategy.
They are an instrument consisting of a systematic, periodic and objective assessment of the functioning of the organisation, the systems of management and the teams put into action by the company in order to limit and invigilate the effect of industrial activities on the environment.

Although there is no specific legislation on environmental auditing in the member states of the European Community, specific actions have been undertaken in some of them on the initiative of professional federations and organisations to promote the development of audits evaluating the environmental management of a given industrial sector.

The Council of the European Communities reached an agreement on March 22-23 on the Regulation creating a Community system of eco-management and environmental eco-auditing which the Commission had proposed to it a year ago (4).

- the establishment and application by companies of policies, programmes and systems of environmental management for their systems of production; 
- the systematic, objective and periodic assessment of the performance of these elements; 
- informing the public of their environmental record;
- the validation by an accredited independent expert of the process of auditing and the information prepared for the public. 


The Participation of the Consumers 

A Swiss citizen consumes what has to be shared between forty Somalis.
The earth's resources could not guarantee a hypothetical, although highly improbable, equality of consumption.
In the comfort of the rich countries this fact is ignored except by certain social movements whcih attempt to explain and convince the population of the West of the need to change its consumption habits.
The author, who recognises the feeble results of such initiatives, reviews the situation of the consumer movement at international level and the initiatives undertaken in Catalonia.

Everyone asks himself: What can I do?
The question is as simple as it is perturbing: all of us can begin by putting our house In order.
The useful pieces of advice for this task are found in the common fund of mankind's traditional wisdom. 
(E.F. Schumacher) 

Modifying European styles of consumption is fundamental to the achievement of ecologically sustainable societies and thus freeing mankind from the growing poverty caused, to a considerable extent, by the monopolisation of the consumable resources -more than 80 per cent by 18% of the world population.
This idea against inequality and growth is widely accepted on paper.
International bodies have agreed with a large part of the diagnosis of the illness but there is still no relevant agreement on what must be done to cure it.

In the opposite direction, here at home a recent study revealed a Catalonia in the year 2010 where none of the five prospective scenarios included one aimed at marching towards a more balanced and sustainable, i.e. ecological, country.
We still don't know what form the concept of sustainable development will take in our country, and it has already been corrupted, before its scope has been explained.
People often speak of "sustainable growth" or "sustained development", forgetting that if an activity is sustainable, it can be maintained for a virtually indefinite time.

The final declaration on the environment and development of the Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro states in article ten that "states will have to promote the awareness and participation of the public, putting information at everyone's disposal".
In the same way, the document "Strategy for the future of life" brought out last year by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) clearly states that the richest social groups and countries live in an unsustainable manner due to their ignorance or lack of concern or to certain incentives favouring consumerism.
This study also states that education is an important factor for modifying Lifestyles and that many people do not find out how they could help others by modifying their consumerist behaviour.

By consumerism we understand the act of buying things we do not need for subsistence.
But it is easy to understand that this social disease is difficult to measure.
This lifestyle is not questioned by the authorities or conventional parties who at most speak of the internal distribution of wealth and its sharing at a regional level, forgetting the planetary imbalances and their environmental impact.
Finally, those who accept the the need to live simply so that others can simply live cannot act in accordance with their ideas under the influence of a persuasive advertising that incites them by communicating intrinsic characteristics that go beyond the product and the service they offer.
In the countries with the highest incomes there are not enough people who have adopted saving measures, recovering customs contrary to waste or who choose products less harmful to the environment.
Among the factors which determine the acquisition of consumer products figure environmental claims, causing a controversy over the ultimate effects of this new stimulus to consumerism.

In a famous previous report, the above-mentioned bodies insisted on graphically demonstrating the serious contrast posed by the fact a Swiss citizen consumes what has to be shared between 40 Somalis.
This disproportion in the consumption of resources is the basis of the strategy for conservation, more than anything because the planet is not capable of admitting and universalising the level of consumption of the Western countries.

Who could be the protagonist of this change in behaviour?
Can it be done?
Which instruments have to be introduced to march towards a sustainable Catalonia?
It is years since Western states decided it was necessary to reduce the influence of the social movements which proposed these changes.

Everything seemed to indicate that the Earth Summit would be a step that would push ecological organisations into the background, but the final result has been a growing concern for the dimension of global environmental problems and the weak role of the world powers in confronting them.

Even in countries whose governments are conscious of the deterioration of the environment there is a tendency to forget the application of nomls if their application involves a reduction in the profitability of an industry.
Without the existence of ecological associations, the safeguard of the common heritage is not guaranteed, as the words of the former director of the CIA to the World Energy Conference in Madrid in October 1992 harshly reveal: for the government of the United States it is a lot easier and more effective to start a war in the Middle East than to decree fuel saving measures.
It is obvious that an ecopacifist movement is building up a moral power opposed to pretensions of maintaining an international order based on the impositions of the Western military commands.
What is unclear is how far and with what results these social movements will be able to seduce the Western population into ceasing to aid this aggressive policy of obtaining resources in order to maintain our lifestyle.

This emerging green movement is not formed only by ecological groups and organisations.
It is necessary to understand it as a network of environmental agents acting in the professional, scientific and social fields.

It is frequently the case that transversal proposals go to make up an ecological nebula.
Consumer movements should provide an important motor, although at home they have still not connected with a more global conspiratory message, centering their action on the quality and price of products and services.

The multinationals: black or green? 

A superficial glance at the operations of the multinational companies clearly demonstrates that their growth has indeed occurred on the basis of development strategies which are ecologically unsustainable.
Along with the development banks and old agencies they are behind a model of development which calls for growth and the depletion of resources.
Since it became very difficult to deny their responsibility they announced their conversion to ecology and claim to have modified their corporative culture.
A detailed study by Greenpeace demonstrates that this is a green window dressing operation.
Led by the public relations multinational Burson-Marsteller, they managed in the Rio Summit to avoid any sort of regulation of their behaviour, declaring that they would provide themselves with their own norms and controls.
But concerted regulation is already in fact a field of participative democracy on which the pressure of the international ecology movements is centered.

The agreements made in Rio de Janeiro contained no changes for the multinationals beyond those of a purely aesthetic nature.
Thus, one of the main producers of chlorofluorocarbons claimed to a precursor of the defence of the ozone layer.
An oil company stated that it had adopted measures to halt the greenhouse effect.
A large manufacturer of pesticides distributes organochlorate pesticides and suggests that it contributes to combatting hunger.
It is evident that the multinationals, the most powerful economic force in the world, resist accepting concerted control systems.
For these reasons it is important to adopt them in sectors where receptive authorities and manufacturers will accept them.

The consumer movement has achieved few results so far.
In the international field there are, however, precedents such as the application of certain sectorial codes of conduct as in foodstuffs for children or the export of pesticides.
Recently, after more than two years' boycott of Nestlé, the international bodies have taken notice of the denunciations of the commercial policy of giving free samples of mother's milk substitute to mothers using health workers as commercial agents.

Even so, there are plenty of examples of how citizens can exercise pressure on industrial and consumption policies.

The appearance of critical shareholders calling for the adoption of ethical and personnel codes, using their vote in assemblies of shareholders, and the boycott campaigns against products, brands and trades, have proven peaceful and practical forms of pressure.
Obviously these campaigns are possible in democratic societies where the citizen is seduced into answering whether his Life style forms part of the problems or part of the solution.

On other occasions the green consumer organisations come to agreements which go beyond what has been decided by the authorities.
This was the case with irradiated foods in the United Kingdom when, the battle for their legal prohibition having been lost, an agreement was reached with the supermarket chains not to sell them.
Sooner or later our consumer organisations will accept that the urgency of the environmental issue is a contemporary one.

In England the ecofeminists have already carried out widespread boycott campaigns against products that carry unnecessary packaging.
Educational campaigns on the overburdening of the environment.
In another field, the concept of "clean production" already forms a part of the alternative discourse of influential organisations such as Greenpeace.

The contemporary nature of this issue has led the multinational companies themselves to incorporate environmental elements into their images.
A good many of them have incorporated their environmental departments into their production plants and, especially, into their marketing publicity, as we pointed out above.
These campaigns have had an impact on the disoriented local social demand.

The very name of "green consumer" to define citizens conscious that small gestures create moral awareness is questionable given that they reduce the human being to a pure demander of products, objects and services.
The ecological slogan of "live simply" comes up against the reality of an economy based on consumption and not on production.
The exploitation of the impulsive predisposition to buy is often combined with an elitist and narcissistic attitude marked by the idea that in an impure world it is possible to be a consumer of pure natural products.
Thus, in the richest countries we observe the appearance of two commercial circuits where alongside income as an indicator of the level of consumption appear other factors such as those of exclusivity and identity.

The question of what is an ecological product and whether there are natural manufactured products is a good one.
It is obvious that the most ecological car is the one which is never made.
What we ask ourselves is whether there can exist norms that define them.
It is reasonable to think that the replacement of toxic elements with a high environmental cost is an applicable criterion, that the assessment of a product must take account of its entire cycle, or the need for environmental taxes.
In addition, there must be a criterion of prevention against the circulation of new products with environmental impact and unknown or uncertain toxicology.

An experience 

The only sector where there exists an experience of concerted regulation at home is that of ecological agriculture in which the Regulatory Council for Ecological Agriculture (CRAE), undergoing a process of transformation, brings together six hundred farms and sixty processing centres.
This system lies outside the general model of the Spanish and Catalan administrations, based on the French tradition, which avoids regulatory systems with representation from the sectors and associations, which can only be found in the education sector, the health sector and in a few protected areas, but not in the general policy applied by the authorities.

Some of these councils have a consultative character, but the CRAE includes its own inspection system to ensure fulfilment of the norms.
A new ambit of participation is the Environmental Quality Council formed by representatives of industry, commerce, the trade unions and consumer and ecological organisations.
This body is part of the Department of the Environment and its purpose is to draw up reports on the articles which wish to receive the ecolabel for non-foodstuffs.
The generalisation of these systems may open the gates to participatory mechanisms which respect the autonomy of the different environmental agents.
Despite their being sectors with limited economic influence they can provide a social experience which is currently very limited.

Different sectors could accept these regulatory systems.

Natural cosmetics, animal experiments, invigilation of laws protecting the fauna and flora and, why not, forestry policy, that of waste or sanitation.
Purposeful ecology will find a space to assert its alternatives.

Towards a Sustainable Society 

The production and consumption of products cause a double impact on the environment: the extraction of resources and the production of wastes.
Ecoproducts must, via new methods of production and recycling, reduce this impact.

Introduction 

The ecological product has become a part of everyday language.
Green products currently form part of marketing strategy and have enlarged the range of options available to the consumer, while their labeling has recently been added to EC regulations.
Ecoproducts are looked upon with mistrust by many ecological groups; they are sometimes taken to court by consumer associations for their failure to meet the ecological virtues to which they lay claim and regulating them does not arouse a great deal of enthusiasm in the relevant public authorities.
But they are here, probably to stay, despite the opinions of their detractors, who consider them a mere fashion often responding to selfinterest.

In view of the fact they are probably here to stay it would seem appropriate to offer a few reflections on the range and meaning of the ecological product in itself, as well as its possible contribution to a more far-reaching project: sustainable development.
In order to do so it is necessary to situate the two questions-that of the ecological product and that of sustainable development-in relation to the current economic system of production and consumption.
This is where we will begin.

Production and consumption; resources and wastes 

In order to understand the role that ecological products could play in sustainable development it is necessary to begin by summarising the way the industrial system of production and consumption functions.
The productive subsystem of the economy (companies), having absorbed and transformed a set of resources from the environment (energy, materials), converts them into a series of consumer products aimed at satisfying the demands of the consumers (families)-consumer products which, after being used for a longer or shorter, but always limited, period of time, finally end up being considered as waste and dumped back into the environment.

Once there, these material anthropic wastes turn, through various biogeochemical processes, into new resources for the human community, thereby completing the circle.
This process, however, can be extremely slow, depending on the degradability of the wastes, their degree of accumulation in space and time and the different capacities of the ecosystems into which they are dumped to make them decompose.
In contrast to this natural recycling, external to the human community, there is also an internal recycling-the one usually referred to as recycling-consisting of withdrawing part of the materials contained in the wastes produced by consumption and reincorporating them into the productive sector in order to make use of them in the manufacture of new products.

In a generic fashion, the activities of production and consumption therefore exercise a double pressure on the environment: extraction of resources on the one hand and dumping of wastes on the other.
Both aspects are, in addition, intimately related.
Discounting the share of resources used to increase the capital stock and stocks of intermediate products and consumer products, the flow of wastes dumped into the environment (in the form of solid wastes liquid discharges and gaseous effluents) is equal to the flow of resources extracted from it: higher rates of extraction inevitably bring about higher levels of dumping in accordance with the predictions of the Law of Conservation of Matter and Energy.
This has particular repercussions in the matter in question.
All other things being equal, an increase in the flow of goods-measured in physical terms-from the production to the consumption sector will bring about an increase in the absorption of resources and, sooner or later, a parallel increase in the dumping of wastes.
This greater extraction of resources will raise the rate at which the non-renewable ones are used up, whilst the risk of over-exploitation of the renewable ones will increase.

Analogously higher dumping of wastes can easily lower the capacity for their neutralisation-particularly in the case of wastes which do not degrade easily-or cause a breakdown in the self-purification mechanisms of the ecosystems through excess dumping of wastes, even if they are degradable.
In both cases the environment's capacity both for generating resources and absorbing resources falls, and the more this happens the more extraction and dumping increase, thus becoming increasingly unsustainable activities.

If we visualise these considerations on a global scale it is not difficult to extract terrifying conclusions.
Since the beginnings of the present century the annual flow of goods and services measured in constant monetary units-the so-called Gross World Product (GWP) has increased thirtyfold.
In order to achieve this spectacular growth, the world economy has had to annually multiply its energy consumption by fifteen, its mineral requirements by thirteen, and-to mention the biggest quantitative discharge into the atmosphere-its carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels by more than twelve.

But the consequences for the environment are even more serious than these undoubtedly alarming figures suggest.

We can see this with two examples: the increasing extraction of a non-renewable resource and wood.

The beds from which minerals are industrially extracted are concentrated deposits, islands of low entropy , in a more homogeneous lithosphere.

The problem is that 5,000 years after man began to make systematic use of minerals, 200 years after the beginning of the industrial revolution, and with the above-mentioned increase in demand during the present century, these islands of low entropy are to be found ever further from the centres of consumption.
They are of worse quality or, if not, need much bigger investments of capital, consequently requiring bigger energy budgets for their exploitation, leading to higher levels of environmental impact.
Thus, most of the copper extracted in the world at the end of the 80s came from countries far from the major urban areas such as Chile, Zambia, Zaire or Papua New Guinea.

Whilst four hundred years ago the metal content of the minerals extracted was around 8%, that of the deposits in the above mentioned countries today does not even reach 1%.
Consequently, in relation to the same amount of metal extracted, the processed mineral has been multiplied by more than eight, with all the energy requirements and environmental impact involved.
It is calculated that in order to obtain the nearly 9 million tonnes of copper produced in 1990 it was necessary to extract and process some 990 million tonnes of mineral.
To this must be added the pollution of the waters and atmosphere of mines such as those of Bougainville Island in Papau New Guinea or foundries such as that of Ilo-Locumbo in Peru, considered amongst the industrial plants with the greatest impact on the environment.

In 1990, world extraction of wood came to more than 3,400 million cubic metres; half of this amount was used as raw material in activities such as building, furniture manufacturing or the making of paper and cardboard.
This commercial exploitation of wood was directly responsible that year for the complete degradation of more than four million hectares of equatorial forest and the over-exploitation of wide areas of boreal and temperate forest.
In the last 25 years commercial extraction of wood has grown by 50 %; the environmental impact of this increase has been devastating, especially for the biodiversity of equatorial forest.
Even selective extraction has had serious consequences: in Brazilian Amazonia the work of extracting only 3 % of the trees-those of greatest commercial interest-caused serious or irreversible damage for more than 50 % of those remaining.
In the developed countries the introduction of rapid growth plantations has allowed production to increase but at the cost of a drastic impoverishment of the original biodiversity and of the services to the human communities of the forested areas.

These plantations were the response to the unusual growth of demand for wood pulp for making paper, a requirement which can be understood if we bear in mind that the per capita consumption of paper and cardboard grew sevenfold in Europe between 1950 and 1990 and that in the United States more than half of the present consumption (which comes to more than 300 Kg per person per year) is used for disposable packaging and wrapping.
It is not necessary to add here the pollutive character of the paper industry, both in terms of liquid discharges and gaseous effluents.

Reduce, repair, reuse, recycle 

Examples such as those cited above could be given without any difficulty both for the pressure exercised by the current demands for resources and the levels reached in the dumping of wastes.
They reveal how widespread demands for materials such as those for metals or wood cause very serious impacts in places often distant from the scenes of our daily lives.
At this point the question to be answered appears clear: is it possible and, even more, viable, to reduce these unsustainable flows of resources and wastes, particularly in the economies where they reach their highest levels, the industrialised societies?
The answer is a definite yes.

In the case of the constituent materials of the different products, their input and output can be reduced by simply diminishing the flow of goods in the consumer production sector.
If we suppose that the characteristics of these products remain the same this would bring about a decrease in the stock of goods available at a given moment for the human community, i.e., a fall in what is usually referred to as the standard of living .

But there are other possibilities.
The first is to lengthen the durability of the products.
This will achieve a decrease in the flow of goods (and in the resources necessary and the waste generated), but without necessarily reducing the stock of goods in service nor, in consequence, the standard of living.
A possible alternative consists not in lengthening the useful life of products but in reducing the material content per unit.
The flow of goods remains unaltered; but not those of resources and wastes, which fall.
Another possibility lies in a share of the constituent materials of the products not coming from the input of resources into the community but from the wastes generated by the latter.

These recycled materials also make it possible to bring about decreases in the inputs and outputs without decreases in the flow of goods or the available stock.

All these options refer solely to the constituent materials of the products, but what about their energy requirements?
Does each of these possibilities also reduce the inputs of energy from the environment (and the outputs as more degraded energy in the first instance, heat)?
Let us see: 

The reduction in the flow of products causes a proportionate decrease in energy requirements.
This is easily seen in the periods of economic recession in which a contraction of consumption (with the consequent fall in production) causes a decrease in the energy used by companies, such as industrial electricity.

The greater durability of consumer products decreases their energy requirement in direct proportion to the increase attained in its useful life.
The energy saving made possible with the lengthening of the useful life of products is very high, particularly when we consider not just their potential useful life (the time in which they can on average be used satisfactorily) but their real useful life or the period in which they are really used before being stored in wardrobes, discarded in junk rooms or taken to the breaker's yard.
Immediately before the first Oil Crisis in 1973, statistics showed that in the most developed countries the real lengths of use of consumer goods from cameras to cars were at least five times lower than their potential useful life.
At the same time, in the least developed countries, these periods of use were up to three times their potential useful life (undoubtedly with notorious losses of efficiency).
If we bear in mind that a 1550 Kg car from that time needed an energy investment of 32 Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (TOE)-a sum equivalent to what is needed to maintain a human being at subsistence level for thirty years-and that it would be used for up to ten years more in a poor country than in a rich one, we will perceive both the level of waste that existed at the time and the manifest inequality at world level.

Today, both the inputs of energy necessary for building a car and its real useful Life have improved somewhat; world inequality has only worsened.

If the amount of materials used in products is decreased this will also mean less energy input, but only on condition that this decrease is not achieved by replacing a given material with one that is lighter in weight but much more intensive in energy.
For example, aluminium or polystyrene are lighter than steel, but the energy needed to produce them is far higher(some 5 TOE/mt for aluminium and 3'5 TOE/ tm for polystyrene, as opposed to 0'5 TOE/tm for steel).
The replacement of alloyed steel by these materials can only justified in vehicles-especially aerial ones-by the importance of the vehicle's weight in its daily fuel consumption.
Recycling normally involves investments of energy substantially lower than the processing of virgin materials.
For example, obtaining recycled aluminium instead of processing bauxite involves a decrease in energy from nearly 5 TOE/mt to less than 0'2 TOE/mt (it is believed that at the beginning of the 90s, 30 % of world aluminium production is already from recycled aluminium and that in the United States the aluminium recycling sector already occupies twice as many workers as the primary sector in the same metal).
Perhaps the common material offering the least energy saving through recycling is glass; even so, the Spanish figures from the end of the 80s reveal an energy saving of 25 % for recycled glass compared to glass produced from virgin materials (silica, sodium carbonate and calcium carbonate) going from 0.3 TOE/mt to little more than 0.2 TOE/mt.
It should be pointed out, however, that all of these comparisons are made at the factory gate and do not include the energy (nor the information) necessary in the process of selection, collection and transport of these materials.
When recycling also includes these inputs and is examined as a whole, it appears to be an energy-saving activity (more or less, according to the material in question) up to a certain point; from there onwards the energy inputs grow rapidly.
As very high rates of recycling are attained, the energy invested goes beyond that which is saved; in the ultimate analysis, total recycling is thermodynamically unviable.
We can therefore conclude synoptically that there are two major alternatives in the field of consumer goods (let us remember that, in order to simplify, we have deliberately left aside capital goods) for reducing resources and wastes and, in consequence, the impact on the environment (of course, the latter depends not only on the intensity of their flows but also on where and how they are extracted and dumped, but let us go hack to the simplified question).
The first consists of reducing the quantity of goods produced and consumed; the second in a transformation of their characteristics.
Ecoproducts are the most explicit expression of the second route: with their use we aim explicitly at tempering the pressure of mankind on the environment, decreasing the impacts connected with both extraction and dumping.
This process of reconverting products is already occurring in a certain number regardless of their identification as ecological products (and, of course, of their labelling as such).
In fact, the emergence of ecoproducts can be seen as the tip of the iceberg, of a process (already begun but still far from reaching its objective) of ecological restructuring of industry , which will embrace both the design and marketing of products friendlier to the environment, involving the general reconversion of technologies and systems of production in order to adapt them to the ever greater environmental awareness of industrialised societies.

The ecological product: concept and range 

At this point we are ready to propose a definition of the ecoproduct.
A product can be considered ecologically recommendable in relation to a standard one taken as reference when it supposes a reduction of the environmental impact associated with its production, use and elimination.
This definition can be complemented with a few detailed points: 

The adjective "ecological", given to a product only means anything in reference to the characteristics of another product widely available on the market and considered as standard.
It is a comparative quality, not consubstantial with the "ecological" article in itself.

We can thus talk of ecological cars or green batteries as long as they offer a clear environmental improvement over standard cars and batteries, even though there may be, from a broader ecological perspective, better transport alternatives than personal transport or batteries, due to their notorious energy inefficiency, should be strictly limited to applications where there is no access to a nearby source of electricity.

The ecoproduct must offer services basically similar to the standard product; otherwise it would be unsuitable to compare them.
An ecological substitute notably inferior in function and quality to the reference article should not be considered an ecoproduct.
The application of this criterion helps to maintain a distance from a series of products of mediocre or even slapdash quality which are attempting to change their images with their ecological qualities.

The decrease in environmental impact associated with the ecoproduct must take the form of a quantitative and/or qualitative reduction in the extraction of resources and dumping of wastes at all stages of its life: manufacture, use and elimination.
1 Increase of the useful life of the product, with the corresponding increase in durability, reparability or reuse.
2 Decrease of the materials and energies invested in each unit of the product and, in consequence, of the wastes it produces. 
3 An increase in its recycled content and its subsequent recyclability as waste.

4 An increase in the product's content of environmentally abundant materials as against those which are environmentally scarce (either because the latter belong to a non-renewable stock in rapid decline or because they come from a particularly limited renewable resource which could be easily over-exploited). 
5 A decrease in the product's content of substances that cannot be easily assimilated in the environment (either because they become wastes which do not degrade easily or because, although degradable, they are toxic in even small concentrations), in favour of others which are more environmentally benign. 



The huge task in front of both technologists and industrial designers in the field of ecoproducts is therefore clear.
The ecological dimension must be a basic part, both in the design of the product in itself and in the processes and technologies necessary to minimise the environmental impact of its total life cycle.
The role of the industrial engineer is obvious, but that of the designer is no less so; in contrast to the concept of the designer so typical in the 80s as mere embellisher of the product's form, the designer of the 90s faces a very different task: how to make products more functional, more durable, more frugal with energy, more repairable, more recyclable and less toxic as waste.

Naturally, this reorientation of their activity, which is more like a true revolution, will depend on what the consumers demand, what the legislators dictate and what the manufacturers allow.

This last comment brings us back to the more general subject of the transition to ecoproducts.
What stimuli can currently induce the productive sector of an industrialised economy to manufacture and market a greater number of ecological articles?
As in other facets of environmental management, it is necessary to distinguish between market mechanisms and instruments beyond the market.
The ecological label is a typical market mechanism (it is not the mission of the present article to consider the pros and cons of ecolabeling in general, nor the formula adopted by the recent Community Regulation in this area).
Its presence on a given product is one more signal from the producer to the consumer (along with the price, the appearance or the brand name of the product) which helps the latter to decide for or against it (for this reason the labelling should never be restricted to a green logo but should be more than anything environmental information about the product; information verified by someone independent of the manufacturer).

Naturally there are many more mechanisms to promote ecoproducts than simply labeling.
There are a large number of both legal provisions and economic instruments which can be applied with success to the proposed transition.
The durability of consumer goods can easily be promoted by increasing the periods of guarantee; the reparability of products through making post-sales services and the existence of suitable replacements obligatory; the reuse of containers or the recyclability of vehicles, utensils and components through the establishment of systems of deposit and return, returning a given sum of money to the buyer upon his returning the product at the end of its useful life, the decrease in the use of virgin materials and the promotion of recycling through rates of tax on resources; the reduction of wastes generated by products through taxes on wastes; the most scarce resources or most hazardous wastes with tough prohibitions.
All these measures if well used and complemented would form a proposal known in the English-speaking countries as a policy mix: the mixing or combining of different legal provisions which will make the current economic system evolve in the desirable direction at the least possible cost.

Ecoproducts and sustainability 

But what is this desirable direction?
It can be no other than that of environmental sustainability: that the activities of production and consumption of all mankind do not exceed the capacity of the environment to supply the resources that they require, nor of absorbing the end wastes of the system.
Given that both the supply of resources and the neutralisation of wastes depend on the state of the systems that generate or absorb them-from the natural ecosystems to the extensively humanised ones- sustainability implies that the actions of the human community must include conservational management of the ecosystems in question.
In this way their indefinite use for the two purposes will be ensured, both for their current beneficiaries and for future generations.
Thus, the general use of ecoproducts can become a route-naturally, there are many- towards this sustainability.
The reason is easy to explain: the replacement of given products by others which are ecologically more benign causes a decrease in the environmental impact associated with their demand for resources and their dumping as wastes per unit.
It can, but not necessarily must , because this potential improvement will be cancelled out if: 

There is an increase in population with its consequent new demand for goods.

Even without this population increase, there is an increase in per capita consumption of goods.

In this manner we come back to the quantitative aspects of the flow of goods which we left momentarily in order to concentrate on the qualitative aspects, of which the ecological product was the most clear expression.
Ecological products cannot produce miracles; they are of little environmental use if there are not parallel processes such as population stabilisation or the moderation of consumption at reasonable levels.
- A great expansion of the goods available to a given human community, with an much smaller increase in the flows of resources and wastes necessary today. 
- An increase in the stock of available goods maintaining the current levels of extraction of resources and dumping of wastes. 
- Stabilisation of the current stock of goods, but with flows of resources and wastes lower than those at present. 
- Decrease of the stock of available goods but with much greater reductions of the input of resources and output of wastes. 


For which of these four development options should a given human community opt?
The reply will depend, in the first instance, on the existing relationship between its current flows of resources and wastes and those which are environmentally sustainable, but in the second place on the comparison between the material level of life that it has already attained and the one it would like to attain: it is possible that a community, a country, will find it possible to sustainably increase its total availability of goods but that it does not do so.
It may wish to concentrate rather on obtaining the current one with less effort or sharing it more equally between its members, thus increasing social wellbeing even though the level of life per capita does not increase.
Many human needs do not have to satisfied through the consumption of products, ecological or otherwise; others scarcely merit the name of needs.

Development only implies a multiplication of goods up to a certain point; and a development which aims at sustainability does not have to be carried to its ultimate consequences: neither resources, nor wastes have to be the ones which are maximally environmentally possible.
These final thoughts should not be lost sight of when situating the contribution-valuable but in itself very limited-of ecological products to the attainment of a truly sustainable society.

How to Make Ecological Products: The Example of Wilkhahn 

The growing awareness of environmental problems has increased the demand for ecological products.
Going beyond the opportunism of many brands, companies such as the German Wilkhahn, which manufacturers office furniture and objects, decided in 1992 to put into action its ko controlling, a system for incorporating ecological issues into the planning, decisions, and development of its manufacturing process.

Exactly 25 years ago the Club of Rome presented its report The Limits to Growth , thereby introducing a paradigm shift, the resolution of which is still not in sight the shift from the mechanical principle of ever more of industrial society to the integrated growth of the post-industrial society.

In the discussions aroused by the Club of Rome's 1968 report two emerged one, that of the green fundamentalists, which argued in favour of a return to the archaic culture of self-sufficiency (and in consequence experimented with alternative lifestyles), and the other, that of undying conviction in the need for techno-industrial advance ecology against economics.

That the differences of opinion on this point continue until the present day was all too evident at the environmental summit in Rio de Janeiro, which was held last year at enormous expense but whose concrete results could be characterised by the phrase great expense and few results.

For many cultural critics, this meeting has served as a demonstration that politics is incapable of overcoming national egoisms (which are absolutely understandable in view of the completely different economic and social realities of the different countries) and developing global strategies for survival.
On the other hand, diverse threats to our natural principles of life have taken forms everyone can recognise: energy crises, smog, destruction of forests, Chernobil, the ozone hole, scandals over polluted foodstuffs, to mention but a few of the most important themes that have formed the awareness of people in the industrialised countries, especially those of Central and Northern Europe.
In a survey carried out in Germany in 1990 a third of the respondents mentioned the issue of the environment as the most important current problem.

In this scenario it is not surprising that those in charge of the economy and industry are paying increasing attention to this subject, even if it is from a long-term perspective, out of a feeling of responsibility.
This is done in an obligatory manner by state regulations, or from a modification of the consumer's conscience, which leads to pressure from the market.

Thus, for example, the majority of the large German chain stores took notice of the questions their customers were asking with increasing frequency about the impact on the environment of certain everyday consumer products.
Adapting to circumstances they have worked with manufacturers to launch a campaign called Green Bridge, which guarantees to the buyer that the packaging of certain products can be returned and eliminated.

The greater part of the responsibility for carrying out an ecological transformation undoubtedly falls upon the productive economy.
As was to be expected, the first ones to appropriate this issue were the marketing strategists.
Today, it is almost impossible in Germany to find products which do not have some highly visible label with the legend "inoffensive to the environment".
This irresponsible practice has led to loss of credibility in quite a few manufacturers and a generalised feeling of scepticism amongst large sectors of consumers.

The company philosophy of Wilkhahn 

At Wilkhahn, a German manufacturer with a presence on the international market which specialises in the design of office furniture and complementary objects, a consciousness of its responsibility for the environment and future generations led to a different, more responsible route.

Since the 50s the company's policy has been defined by two principles: truth of the products and fair play in relation to the employees.
These find expression in a number of ways, including a style of cooperative management and a high degree of profit-sharing with the workers The products policy is in line with the corporation's classic rules of construction, according to which the aesthetic and practical interest of an industrial object must coincide.
Wilkhahn attempts to create products which are neither arbitrary nor affected, nor a thoughtless reaction to fashion, but innovatory, clear, formal and functional, and long-lived.
They must offer, where possible, a contribution to the culture of our time.

With its slogan for the long term, Wilkhahn complied with an important ecological principle at a time when the concept of ecology was known only to the experts.
One of the most famous professional design schools in Germany, in Ulm, which was the most influential in European industrial design in the second half of the century, formulated the requirements in the following manner: 

"The objective is to produce products with long lives, to increase their use value and reduce waste".
This requirement was proposed 40 years ago, at a time in which American and later European consumer society functioned in accordance with the principal always achieving new production records.
Wilkhahn worked closely and fruitfully with the Professional Design School for many years, this work not being limited to the design of the product but also extending to all manifestations of the company, thereby creating a clear corporate identity.
This ideology is evident in the architecture of the factory building, constructed in that period and conceived in accordance with the same principles with which Wilkhahn's chairs and tables were produced.

Company culture and environment 

It was logical that a company with such ethical principles would ask increasingly urgent environmental questions and seek new routes with social responsibility to contribute as far as possible to the protection and care for natural vital space.

With a declaration of principles in 1988 the value of the ecological complex in the company was determined: 
"The board and management of the company have jointly decided to seriously consider ecological demands and, in case of doubt, to give them more value than that of a rapid profit".

The road was now open for undertaking an ecological change with far-reaching consequences for the entire company and its surroundings.
All the participants clearly understood from the beginning that this was not a little more protection of the environment or energy saving (which in the best of cases is no more than an alibi, but an environmental criterion integrated into the company's planning with the objective of constantly improving the ecological aspects of all the company's processes and products In order to give the company the necessary initial impulse a special commercial management department, Innovation and Technology, was created and Professor Rüdiger Lutz, a scientist of international renown, put in charge of it.

1 to inform the workers and convince them of the proposal and 
2 to draw up an environmental balance sheet for the company in order to assess its real state and deduce the steps to be taken. 


At the beginning of 1992 a working party was organised to fix the objectives In this manner, management, technicians and workers from the different departments became familiar with the Oko-Controlling project Wilkhahn worked for this project jointly with the famous Institut für "Okologische Wirtschaftsforschung" (Institute for ecological economic research) of Berlin.
It is the first time in the manufacturing economy of the Federal Republic of Germany that a system of Oko-controlling has been developed which embraces the entire company.
As a pilot project, the result of which may also be transferred to other companies and sectors, it receives financial support from the Ministry of Economy and Environment of the Bundesland of Lower Saxony.
Wilkhahn has invested 1.3 million DM in this project for a period of two years.

What Oko-Controlling means 

Oko-controlling must be understood as an instrument, with the aid of which ecological questions are incorporated systematically into the plans, decisions and developments of the company.

It is thus possible to seek out ecological problems, make an evaluation and develop concrete measures for their elimination, or to optimise measures already introduced.
- to define in detail each of the ecological objectives in the company 
- to define the fields of ecological problems in the company and 
- to fix the key points for the following stage of research or of the project. The company's own information and the data from the suppliers are the starting point for this development.



The commercial ecological balance offers a general panorama of the company in the form of an input output analysis.

In the input are registered the raw materials, the auxiliary and commercial materials and energy.
In the output, in contrast, the products and emissions produced by manufacture, especially the waste waters, escape of air, wastes, irradiated heat and noise.
The next step in drawing up the balance of the process is to contrast inputs and outputs.
This is used to localise the weak points and the potentials for optimisation.

Finally, the balance of the product is used to make an ecological evaluation of the finished products at the end of the production cycle, and to register obtaining of raw material, prior production, production, distribution, transport, use, elimination and recycling.

Production criteria 

- CompLiance with conditions favouring the environment, 
- social requirements, 
- damage to the environment, 
- overburdening of the air, 
- overburdening of the water, 
- overburdening of the soil, 
- toxicity, 
- damage to the environment due to breakdowns 
- internalisation of the environmental costs as company costs 
- obtaining raw materials, prior production, consumption 
- elimination 
- recycling capacity 


The information thus obtained, which can be activated through the processing of electronic data in the form of typical data, is the basis of the oko-controlling, an effective and important instrument for the selection of raw materials, suppliers, procedures or means of transport.

The new responsibility of the designer 

If in the past form and function were the definitive criteria for the design of a product, a new one is now being added which takes account of the environmental conditions.
Over the last few years the concept of eco design has arisen.
Key characteristics of this idea are the durability of the products, the preference for natural raw materials, the capacity for reproduction of the materials used, the modest use of materials, and that they should be suitable and ecological.
Easy repair, easy dismantling, possibilities for recycling, without emissions from the products, are the most notable properties which must be complied with.

At the same time, it is evident that ecological design has a decisive influence on the tolerance of the environment to the processes connected with the product, from the obtaining of material to the process of production, transport and packaging costs to the evaluation of the products when they have ceased to be used.

Picto, the ecochair of the 90s 

In the office chair Picto, which Wilkhahn presented in 1991 in the EIMU of Milan and which it has been manufacturing for six months, all the above mentioned aspects were taken into account: 

The construction and the material have been planned to be enduring.
Compound materials (which make recycling difficult or impossible) have been rejected.

Instead, the chair is composed of materials whose manufacture and use are ecologically inoffensive and whose preparation and reuse presents no problems, in accordance with the current state of technology.
The construction presents no stuck or soldered joints.
Each part of the chair can thus be dismantled without any problem, and are provided with the usual identification of the material.

The international technical press unanimously praised Picto as the eco chair of the 90s.
The fact this chair has reaped great success on the international market also speaks in favour of the concept today.

Picto is at the same time the obvious demonstration that ecological does not have to mean ugly, heavy or old-fashioned but represents, on the contrary, with the modest use of material and the corresponding reduction in form, a new quality, which is aesthetic and up to date.

The argument made in many sectors that it is impossible to reconcile the ecological and economic aspects is also defeated: it is found, without considering its characteristics of use, in a price range in which the buyers of office chairs previously had to be satisfied with much less.

Alvin Toffler, one of the founders of futurology, wrote:
In the coming millenium only those companies which have two decisive factors will survive successfully:
The first, people who are convinced of the correctness of what they are doing and its social legitimacy; second, an ecological accounting of production and products.

The Wilkhahn company wishes to make Tomer's ideas a reality.

Interview with Anita Roddick 

The name of The Body Shop reaches far beyond the products it sells.
In addition to soaps, shampoos, moisturising lotions and hair dyes, the company has introduced to the market the creed of its daily practice of "refill, recycle, reuse", the denunciation of cosmetics advertisements which promise impossible miracles, its stance against animal experiments, the protection of indigenous communities through fair trading, the use of natural and renewable raw materials and, of course, its campaigning to defend human rights where they are threatened.
Despite which, when you ask Anita Roddick about the ecological product, she looks surprised and exclaims: What on earth is the ecological product?

At the beginning of your adventure with The Body shop it seems that you were compelled to take a number of measures which now appear to be the genesis of your company's environmental policy.
Were you conscious of this content?
Were you already concerned about the protection of the environment? 

When I opened The Body Shop in 1976 my major concern was to balance the books.
Everything I did was based on the simple rules of domestic economy because I didn't have any money and all that was needed was a good dose of common sense.
The lack of money created the need not to waste, this is a typical postwar mentality which I had known very well at home.
Therefore, to refill, recycle and reuse all the containers of the products I sold, whether they were lotions, shampoos or skin creams, was the most sensible, the only sensible thing to do in those circumstances.
We recycled because we had no other option.
This was the model of behaviour I adopted from the start, impelled by economic necessity.
And it's what I think we all should be doing today.
Naturally, when we started refilling bottles 17 years ago nobody understood us, because the cosmetics trade was based on presentation, on the packaging.
And ideas about the environment were still at a very early stage.
Arguments ranged mainly around the effects of certain pesticides, perhaps more due to what was said in certain books than to the actions of movements to protect the environment, which were practically nonexistent in the sixties and seventies.

You then found that these Issues were beginning to occupy the spotlight just at the time that The Body Shop was taking off, when shops were opening in Englandand the first branches were appearing abroad.

Yes, it wasn't something that happened suddenly.

It was a slow process.
It came about in various ways.
On the one hand, we had a resource which allowed us to reach many people in the form of The Body shop, a shop with a definite physical identity which offered a type of cosmetic without miracle promises.
The more shops we opened, the more people came in or went past our windows.

Certain groups who knew about our awareness, such as Greenpeace and the Friends of the Earth, suggested we promote initiatives, not products.
And we liked the idea.

We always liked the idea of education becoming an integral part of your growth, of having a form of public education.
We worked with Greenpeace for two years, with eye-catching posters in the windows and pamphlets and petitions on the counters so the customers could sign petitions for changes in the law or show their support for certain initiatives.
Working with these groups made us stronger.
And there is no way you can launch a public education campaign without educating yourself.
You must write pamphlets, design posters and draw up messages.
It is something that affects you.
We went through five years of learning and consciousness raising in the company, during which we came to understand the nature of the global concerns and necessities.

However, you appear to have abandoned this sort of cooperation with other groups.

Yes . . . and no.
What happened was that we realised that we were faster and bolder than many environmental groups.
We therefore decided to do things by ourselves.
We began campaigns on other issues using information supplied by environmental groups and asked people to join.
Not to join us, because there was nothing to join in The Body Shop.
We just wanted people to change the laws or reproach the government or governments for their harmful environmental policies.

If we observe the evolution of your company since 1976, where would you situate the break, the moment at which the idea of incorporating a strong social component into your industrial practices emerged? 

As I told you before, this was always present in one form or another.
But if it was necessary to choose a date it would be April 1984 when the company was floated on the Stock Exchange.
Until then we had had a turnover of less than a million pounds, although our net profits barely exceeded twenty-five thousand.
Suddenly, on the clay of the floatation, the value of The Body Shop rose to seven and a half million pounds and, as someone at my side said to me as I watched the constant rise in the value of the shares in amazement: "Anita, you've got 1,300,000" .
In the batting of an eyelid we had the symbols of fortune and greed in our hands, we were rich, we owned a prosperous company, the world saw us as the epitome of success.
All of which had the opposite effect on us, me, my husband and those who then made up The Body Shop.
We said to ourselves: in addition to being a successful company, in addition to taking profitability as a business criterion, our main objective, apart from making a profit, was to be a voice for social change and environmental awareness.
It was a question of responsibility with ourselves, of faithfulness to our past.
We established an Environment Department to supervise our industrial practices and audit the way we did things.
The process of educating yourself is very slow and you hardly realise when it's happening.
But now, looking back on the last seven or eight years, you see what has been done and you're a bit a surprised at the speed at which the changes have occurred.
And they're still gaining speed.
The culmination of this process is naturally the central role that the Environment Department now plays in the company, which it practically controls.
If it decides that something can't be done because it is morally wrong then we don't do it even though all the commercial aspects augur well for the initiative.

Every company has now got an environment department and has declared its concern for these issues: there are big, powerful ones, such as DuPont and ICI, public ones and private ones.
What is the difference between The Body Shop and these companies?

Our department, our environmental policy, is based on action, not on rhetoric.
Everything we decide we make public.
Every disaster or piece of pollution we have caused has been immediately audited and the results, favourable or not, made available to the public.
The environmental philosophy is based on an ethical point of view from which no corner of the company escapes.
We think that the companies you mention are still protecting the most vulnerable part of their industrial policy: avoiding disasters because otherwise it will cost them a lot of money.
More than anything it's risk management.
We think that you have to be honest about your impact on the environment and let the public in on it.
This is good business practice.
In recent years, every one of our decisions in this area has been open to inspection and this is a practice that would be very difficult for other companies.
If cosmetics companies can say how much energy they consume and commit themselves to certain limits, it would oblige others in the chemical, petrochemical, fields, etc., to do likewise.
Sharing this information and these practices with the public would have a strong moral impact.

Would you say that this is a substantial difference between The Body Shop and the International corporations in your sector?

Not alone.
The other area where we are totally different is that environmental management is constant in all the aspects of the entire company, from manufacture to distribution or the way of setting up the shops and providing a service through them.
It is a process of continual education for all of us.
Once you become an employee of The Body shop you can't escape it, it forms a part of your work, of the way your personal worth is evaluated.
And I don't see anything similar in other companies.
It's easy to have a department of something, even an idiots department, but the important thing is what the department does, its influence in the company and how its actions are translated into the final product.
I think that few companies with a rediscovered vocation for defence of the environment would stand up to an analysis from this point of view.

You mentioned your own story when explaining the present outline of The Body Shop.
To what aspect were you referring?

In the sixties I was an activist, and like every activist I met in the anti-nuclear movement or the defence of human rights, I wasn't only concerned with those issues.
It was merely an umbrella under which we sheltered, but which covered a wide range of interests and concerns.
The same happens with this company.
We have two big umbrellas where we act with political, boldly political, criteria.
One is public education on the issues that worry us about the world around us and the other is human rights.
What we do to promote human rights goes much further than what any other company would be prepared to do with practical measures, advertising or campaigns.
I think that education is a constant process of giving and taking through every one of the things we do and its projection in the world.
In 1984 we were seen as the symbol of success, a rich, expanding company, the financial press described me with the archetype of one of "Thatcher's daughters" .
And all they talked about was money, not responsibility.
When you spend time in the City you can't help being horrified by the language you hear.
Everyone is talking about money, of profit and how to obtain it, without caring a fig if it is at the cost of the tropical forests, indigenous communities or abuses of every kind.
These people make no connection they don't care at all.
The more you educate someone, the more they understand that the serious problems of our times have clearly defined causes: the big corporations and their products.
We take another route.
Instead of using money to surround ourselves with the emblems of success and power- sumptuous clothes, big cars, princely mansions, exotic lifestyle-we decided to use it for the things that concern us, that interest us.

First and foremost in running our own house better.

As we have seen, you have never kept your opinions a secret.
I hope you won't mind If I succumb to the temptation of conspiracy theories: have you ever had problems with the big corporations, or do you fear that something unexpected could suddenly happen to wreck everYthing? 

The 100 most powerful transnational companies in the world control 80% of world trade.
We can't fool ourselves: that's where the real power in the world is.

Having said that, we haven't had any problems because we are not an economic threat, all we are is a good example of what they shouldn't do.
The question is: if we, who don't even have a fraction of their power, can do it, what is stopping them from doing it as well?
Sometimes our position is attributed to the purpose of selling more so as to make more money.
This is such a simplistic argument that it is not even worth refuting, but, when it comes down to it, anyone can see that our current policy costs us a lot more-in money, personal energy, in everything-than a good advertising campaign, which might allow us to earn more if we only sought to increase sales and profits.
It's as simple as that.
The only place where we do have problems with the transnational companies is in Germany, whose powerful cosmetics industry has allied to carry out exclusionist tactics and doesn't allow us to put any sort of declaration on our labels against animal experiments or in favour of the social campaigns in which we are involved.
They say it's a trading advantage, and they also say this when we defend human rights and distribute information to our customers.
What do they mean by trading advantage?
It causes us heaps of problems, it doesn't leave a penny in the till and they still tell us it's a trading advantage.
And these are the same companies that then say that they use products free of gases which affect the ozone layer.

You said before that the Environment Department practically controls the company.

How much is practically? 

We constantly pay the price for what we preach When you transmit passion for change or a new way of conducting business, people are going to hold you at your word and demand that you keep to it.
I'll explain this with an example of something that happened to us this week.
We are developing a line of products comprising plant-based hair dyes.
Since it is a powder which must be kept completely dry, we prepared containers coated with aluminium.
The art team designed us a beautiful packet, with very attractive graphics.
But then the environment department intervened and rejected the container because nothing can be done with it after it has been used apart from throwing it away.
So we just had to start from scratch to find a better solution.

According to some people you are one of the pioneers of the ecological product, the essence of which, however, still seems to be a bit vague.

The ecological product?
But what on earth is the ecological product?
Well, nothing occurs to me on the subject.
Let's say as point number one that if you are in business you canït be the best friend of the environment because your sole purpose is to produce more and more.
And one of our problems is precisely that we produce more and more things.
What we have decided in our company is not to be a part of this marketing language for green things, simply because it's all a lie.
However, we feel totally responsible for keeping our own house clean and taking care of our own wastes.
This means acquiring ingredients from sustainable resources and minimising the wastes as far as possible.
We believe that these are the objectives that every company should aim for.
But we would feel ashamed of proclaiming: oh, we are very conscientious about the environment and it worries us a lot!
at the same time as producing 200 million tons of shampoo...
If we're concerned about working with the best criteria and the strictest discipline in the world in relation to the environment, the really serious thing to do is to work towards an economy which produces less, that is, to produce socially responsible goods and services.
The world does not need another electric tooth brush which tickles the roof of your mouth into the bargain.
And if we are going to make products which are not a case of life and death, such as a shampoo, we must do so with ingredients which support and sustain, for example, an indigenous group or a community in the developing countries.
Products which have cultural values attached to them: this objective is what allows me to justify the opening of more Body Shops.

But there is a double game between the buyer and the seller.
The former also decides which product he wants and in what amount.

Of course, and this is a crucial aspect.
I think that the biggest conspiracy of silence in our society is that of the consumer, who still doesn't realise the powers he possesses, by the physical goods which he is surrounded.

Not by what he thinks, for what he does.
That is to say, what you wear, what you drive, how you are seen is the road to happiness.
This is the message from the media, from advertising and, naturally, from the companies which produce those products and encourage this sort of world.

This must change because we are leading resources to their grave.
And I firmly believe that there is a great spirit of regeneration amongst the people who think that these things are not precisely the ones that will make them happy.

Consumer power.
But the capacity of the economic system to coopt this power and reabsorb it in other commercial forms is formidable.
Today we already have the ecological product precisely as a response to a greater concern for the environment.
To what extent can the control of the consumer really change things?

A lot more than we imagine.
I think that some of the tendencies that seem eternal to use will change.
For people, for the consumer, there will come a time when they will understand what is going on and desire less things, which will make it possible to sustain the current supply of goods and, on the other hand, bring about the return of many forms of craftsmanship, many lost trades.
I see this at home.
I have two daughters, one is 23 and the other 21.
The latter, who has been an environmental activist since she was 16, has hardly bought two pairs of trousers in her adult life.
She never buys without making her own investigation of the manufacturer.
My elder daughter is more inclined towards fashion, but now she says "I donït want to buy labels or brand names, I want to buy things that I really like", and when she hears that there are companies, famous as they may be, which use children in south-east Asia in the production lines or which destroy the forests, she simply doesn't buy their products, and tell her friends not to either.
It seems amazing to me, because at her age I would never have thought of doing such a thing.
It is surprising sort of behaviour, but it is a very powerful weapon in the hands of the consumers, who still haven't put their fingers on the trigger.

Legislation on Eco labeling 

Introduction 

One of the objectives established in the EC's Fourth Environmental Action Programme (1987-1992) was the promotion of clean products.
The second reference by the EC came from the European Parliament, which, in the Resolution of 19 July 1987 on waste management and former dump sites, proposed the creation of an eco-label.

The promotion of an eco-label was aimed from the start at providing incentives for clean technologies and, as a result, the manufacture of products with less negative impact on the environment.

An important precedent for the Community initiative was the Blue Angel Plan officially launched in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1978.
Although it is supported by the Federal Government, the plan is not controlled by the latter.
It has now awarded eco-labels to more than 3,500 products.
In 1988, surveys indicated that 79 % of German consumers recognised the Blue Angel symbol.
Thus, through the mechanism of a more ecological consumption, advances have been made in the technologies of production.

When the efficiency and safety of the products is equal, indicators of consumption reveal that a majority of consumers are prepared to pay up to 10 % more for the product which guarantees more respect for the environment.
Evidently, when it is less efficient these preferences are reversed, and the effect of the eco-label as an incentive to consumption disappears.

Various European countries already have very advanced projects, while the White Swan programme has already been put into action in the Scandinavian countries.
Eco-labeling systems are already officially ready in Denmark, France, Ireland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.

The Community initiative took shape with the Council Resolution of 17 May 1990 which invited the Commission to present an eco-labeling proposal taking account of the environmental impact at every stage of the product's life.
This resolution resulted in Council Regulation (EEC) 880/92 of 23 March 1992 published in the Official Journal of the European Community (OJEC) on April 11 of the same year.
The system of eco-labeling was launched under the logo of a green daisy surrounded by twelve blue stars.

The aim is to apply this system of eco-labeling in all the member states of the EC, in a rather late attempt to avoid the proliferation of different labeling systems in each state.
The different eco-labeling plans now seem to be consolidated, motivated not only by the Community initiative but also by the desire of each state to add prestige to its trade internally and externally.

It may be for this reason that the Community regulation, despite being obligatory and to be fully applied in all the member states, does not prohibit the maintenance of the individua eco-labeling systems, which are therefore not incompatible with the Community system as long as they do not cause confusion among consumers.

In Catalonia it was stated in a specialist magazine that the Generalitat wanted to set up an eco-labeling scheme for Catalan products.
The truth is that there now seems to be no such intention, and that the efforts of the Department of the Environment of the Generalitat are simply aimed at achieving the full application of the Community eco-labeling in Catalonia.

Even so, the opportunity for a Catalan label would have to arise from factors such as: a) the real possibility of access of Catalan products to the Community label, b) the possible limitations that could be imposed by the environmental policy of the central government, c) the peculiarities of the Catalan processes of production and distribution, which could require the incentive of an accessible ecological guarantee at a low cost.

The Community eco-labeling covers approximately 10 % of the most consumed products on the European market.
In this way the incentive created is higher than if the attempt were made to cover 100 % of products, a feat which is unfortunately impossible in any case.

The EC has draw up a list of 23 products which will soon carry this eco-label.
The studies for putting this distinguishing mark into effect are very slow since there are many economic interests in play.

It appears that the first products to be labeled will include: recycled paper, insulation materials, textiles, detergents, domestic cleaning products, solar photovoltaic systems for heating with water, paints, varnishes, batteries and accumulators.
It is still not known when the first ecological label will appear, although the products which could be awarded it soonest are washing machines, washing powders and paper.

The most optimistic voices say the Community ecolabels will start to appear in the summer of 1993.
If this were the case we would be able to speak of a complete success, but we will have to wait for many aspects of the application and financing to be properly established.
Without this it would be difficult to speak of a real application, and in fact it must be strongly borne in mind that application without well-prepared practical and financial mechanisms could lead to a fall in the system's prestige amongst European politicians, manufacturers and consumers.

Council Regulation (EEC) 880/92 

This provision is based on article 130 S of the Treaty, introduced by the Single European Act.
It is important to remember that this is a Regulation, that is, a provision to be directly applied to the member states, unlike a Directive, which needs to be adopted in the internal legislation of each country.
In addition, the advantage of the Regulation is that it obliges the member states to apply the provision simultaneously and in the same way, thereby facilitating the process.

The Regulation is not a systematic and rigorous provision, and has undergone various modifications in the course of being drawn up.
If we compare the initial project with the final text of the Regulation we see that certain definitions have been removed.
Finally, the approved text reflects great caution on the behalf of the legislator, conscious of the direct importance it will have in the fields of competition and the free circulation of goods, and the indirect importance it will have in the field of production and distribution of products.

One of the most definitive elements is that the process of obtaining the eco-label will be totally voluntary for manufacturers and importers.
It will be introduced gradually, and there are no cases in which the label is obligatory for a product.

Obtectives of the eco-label 

- to promote products which have less impact on the environment. It is therefore in line with the wish to encourage the introduction of clean technologies. 

- to provide consumers with better information on the ecological repercussions of the most consumed products. 


Protagonists: the products 

The eco-label is awarded to the products, not to their packaging or their production process.
This does not mean that the processes of obtaining raw materials, production, packaging, transport and final elimination of the waste are not borne in mind.
As we have already stated, the entire life cycle of the product is taken into account, from before its birth (raw materials) to after its death (recycling, rendering inert or final elimination).
The problem of packaging is dealt with in Council Directive 83/189/ EEC, OJEC L 109, of 26 April 1983.

In the end, it is the product which will be considered worthy or not of being awarded the eco-label.

The eco-label is to be applied not only to European products but also to those imported from outside the Community.

The eco-label is to be applied especially to highly consumed products.
- those which in themselves are already considered to have no significant impact on the environment 
- specifically, those which contain substances or preparations classified as hazardous in accordance with Directive 67/548, EEC. See below in the list of legislation for the series of modifications to this Directive.
However, exceptionally, the eco-label can be awarded when the product contains only one of the substances or preparations considered hazardous.

- generically, those manufactured by processes which can cause appreciable harm to people or the environment. 
- specifically, foodstuffs, drinks and pharmaceutical products. 


Elements of the eco-labeling scheme 

The principal elements involved in eco-labeling are as follows: 

Categories of products 

The Commission will have to classify the different products currently on the market according to categories which will guarantee homogeneous application throughout the Community.
The categories will be based on products which have similar purposes and equivalent uses.

Some 16 or 17 categories are currently being defined for products which are highly consumed -dishwashers, detergents, textiles, paints, etc. 
This process of definition of product groups will be performed by the Commission, assisted by a Committee formed by representatives of the member states.
The Commission must consult the interested parties before presenting a proposal for categories or criteria for assessment to the Committee.

The Forum 

These interested parties will take part in a Forum to be formed, as a minimum, by representatives of industry, commerce, consumer organisations and ecological organisations from the Community.

After consulting the Forum, the Commission will send the Committee the plans for the measures it wishes to apply along with the result of these consultations.

Should the Committee come to an unfavourable decision, or simply not issue one, the proposal will be returned to the Council, which can take a decision within three months.
Thus, within the range of different procedures the Commission can employ in relation to the Committees, the procedure included in the Regulation provides the Council with many options, which means giving greater power to political elements than the strictly technical or environmental ones.

Assessment criteria 

There is a clear lack of definition on this point in the Regulation, which only states that the products must fulfill EC requirements in the fields of health, safety and the environment .
This lack of definition should, however, be considered positive for keeping the legislation up to date with the constantly occurring technical and environmental advances, which can be included in the assessment criteria.

1 Must be precise, clear and objective.
2 Must guarantee a high level of environmental protection. 
3 Must be based as far as possible on the use of non-pollutive techniques. 
4 In relevant cases, they must reflect the possibility of extending the life of the product to the full. 
5 That they must be practical criteria, since there would Be no sense in requiring impossible results. 
6 They must be applied homogeneously.
7 They have a limited validity of three years, after which they must be reexamined. 


The ecological criteria for each group of products are defined on the basis of a study of the product's impact on the environment from start to finish, i.e., over its whole life.
Each group of products will thus be analysed in an overall fashion, not just in relation to certain characteristics.

Assessment matrix 

The same Regulation contains the guidelines for environmental assessment of the product (see figure I in Catalan text).

The processes to be employed in order to reduce the environmental impact of a given product have not been included in the final text of the current Regulation.
As elsewhere, this lack of definition has been maintained expressly in order to concentrate the Regulation on the most essential aspects of the process of eco-labeling.

- Less use of natural resources and energy.
- Less use of raw materials. 
- reduction of emissions into the atmosphere, soil and waters.
- reduction of the generation of wastes and noise. 
- use of clean technologies guaranteeing a high level of environmental protection. 
- Lengthening the Life of the product as far as possible.


The competent body 

Each member state must designate the body, or bodies, responsible for awarding eco-labels.
The Regulation permits the existence of more than one body, and the states must guarantee that their composition allows them to act neutrally and independently in order to apply the provisions of the Regulation in a coherent manner.

The Regulation does not state whether these bodies must be public or private, although it logically follows from the guarantees that each member state has to give that they be public.
However, it will be necessary to ensure that the knowledge of their members covers a range of disciplines corresponding to the different types of criteria which must examined in the award process.

The existence of a competent body or bodies in every state reflects the decentralised nature of the award process, which has been chosen in order to avoid a concentration of business in the offices of the EC.
There is no legal impediment on the behalf of the Community or in Spanish law to an Autonomous Community with powers in the area of environmental protection having its own competent body for the award of eco-labels.

The reasons for establishing one or more competent bodies should be due not to political reasons but to provide a service to the territory's producers and importers.
The establishment of such a body will therefore have to reflect the size of the territory's productive and commercial sectors.

Procedure for awarding the eco- label 

Manufacturers and importers will only be able to present the corresponding application to the competent body in their territory.
- over manufacture, when manufacture occurs in the territory 
- over imports, when a product is imported into the territory from an area outside the EC. 
- over marketing, when the product is marketed for the first time in that territory. 


When the competent body has received the application it will evaluate the product according to the health, safety and environmental criteria established for each product category.
If the application is accepted, a proposal of award will be communicated to the Commission.

When it has received the proposal, the Commission will give notice of the award decision to the competent bodies in each state.
If the Commission does not give notice of any objection to the proposal within thirty days, the competent body will definitively award the eco-label.

The draft regulation provided for the setting up by the states of an appeals procedure for those refused the label.
However, this possibility of appeal was eliminated in the approved text, laying the way open to a situation in which the applicant could be defenceless and, at bottom, the introduction of practices which could be arbitrary or non-homogeneous.

The use of the eco-label 

When the eco-label has been awarded, the competent body will sign a contract with the applicant, specifying conditions of use, the dues to be paid by the applicant, revocation of use and duration.

The eco-label cannot be used in advertising until it has been awarded.
It is understood that the whole award process will be confidential and that this confidentiality will be binding on all those involved in the process.

The cost of the process 

This is one of the great question marks hanging over the process of eco-labeling.
In the draft regulation the cost of the process was to be paid initially by the national and Community authorities, and later to become self-financing through the payment of a fee of 0.15% per unit of eco-labeled product.

- the cost of processing the application, to be paid by the applicants. 
- the fees for use, to be paid by the users.


These costs have not been determined and will be fixed by the competent bodies, following the Commission's guidelines, and may vary from state to state.

Coming into force 

Although the Regulation literally came into force on 11 April 1992, the day of its publication in the OJEC, its practical application is running up against a lot of problems.
One only has to look at the delay and lack of results in such important areas as the designation of the competent bodies.
Internal elements dealt with by each state, the definition of the product categories, the establishment of the assessment criteria and, finally, the costs and the financing of the institutions which will carry out the process are all conditioning the will and possibilities for a rapid introduction of the eco-label.

Decree 255/1992 of the Department of the Environment of the Generalitat of Catalonia. 

The Department of the Environment promulgated this decree in agreement with the Government of the Generalitat in order to ensure that EC eco-labeling is carried out to the full in Catalonia.
It basically establishes that the competent body for the award of eco-labels within the framework of products established by the Community Regulation will be the Department of the Environment's General Directorate of Environmental Quality.

The Decree created the Environmental Quality Council as the Department's consultative and assessment body to act in accordance with the powers and the territory of the Generalitat of Catalonia in the area of eco-labeling of products.
1 To produce binding reports on the applications for eco-labels presented to the General Directorate of Environmental Quality.
2 To draw up reports on the design, production, marketing and use of products which demonstrate a minimal effect on the environment during the course of their life cycles and to provide consumers with better information on the ecological repercussions of certain products. 
3 To encourage the production, distribution and consumption of products less harmful to the environment. 
4 Any other sort of assessment assigned to it by the Department of the Environment. 


In addition to the Conseller of the Department and the Director General of Environmental Quality, the Environmental Quality Council will be formed by a number of members including, in the form of a forum, the representatives of the Catalan organisations with an interest in the process.
However, direct representatives of the biggest Catalan business organisations are absent from the Council.

As a measure in line with the promotion of ecological products, the Department of the Environment of the Generalitat of Catalonia also promulgated the Resolution of 16 October 1992 announcing prizes for ecoproducts, prizes which were finally awarded to the corresponding bodies.

Other legislation 

On hazardous substances 

Directive 67/548 on the classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous substances.

Directives 73/173, 77/723 and 88/379 on packaging and labeling of hazardous preparations.

Annexes I and II of Commission Directive 92/37 EEC, of 30/4/92, adapting Directive 67/548 to technical progress for the 16th time.
OJEC L 154,5/6/92.

Commission Directive 92/69 EEC, of 31/7/92 adapting to technical progress for the 17th time.
Commission Directive 67/548, on the approximation of the regulatory and administrative legal provisions in the areas of classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous substances.
OJEC L383.

Commission Communication according to art. 2 of Commission Decision 85/71/EEC, of 21/12/84, on the list of substances notified in application of Council Directive 67/548 EEC.
OJEC L91,10/4/92.

Royal Decree 2216/1985, of 23 October, approving the Regulation on the declaration of new substances and classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous substances.
BOE 27/11/85.

Order of 9/12/1992 of the MOPT bringing up to date the technical annexes of the Regulation on declaration of new substances and classification, packaging and labeling of hazardous substances approved by Royal Decree 2216/1985 of 23 October.

Informative labels for certain products 

Proposal for Council Directive on the standard information on household electrical appliances concerning consumption of energy and other resources.
COM (91) 285.

OJEC C 235 10/9/91.

Council Directive 86/594/EEC, of 1/12/1986, on the noise emitted by household electrical products, to be indicated on labels concerning energy consumption.
OJEC L 344, 6/12/86.

Council Directive 79/531 EEC on energy labeling for electric ovens.
OJEC L 145 13/6/1979.

Opinion on the proposal for Council Directive on the approximation of the regulatory and administrative legal provisions of the member states in relation to the labeling of materials used in the main components of shoes for sale to the final consumer.
OJEC C 287 4/11/92.

Labeling of agricultural products and foodstuffs 

Modification of the proposal of the Council on ecological production of agricultural products and their labeling COM (OJEC C 101, 18/4/1991).

Proposal for Council Directive modifying Directive 79/112 EEC on the approximation of the legislations of the member states in the area of labeling, presentation and advertising for foodstuffs.
OJEC C 122 14/5/92.

Council Regulation 2092/91, of 24/6/1991, on agricultural production and its indication on agricultural products and foodstuffs.
OJEC L 198, 22/7/ 1991.

Royal Decree 212/1992, of 6 March, approving the General Norm on Labeling, presentation and advertising of agricultural products 9BOE 72, 24/3/ 92).

Commission Decision 13/4/92 requesting the Kingdom of the Netherlands to adjourn the approval of a bill on labeling of emulsified fats.

The Geneva Population Conference, March 1993 

The progressive and unstoppable growth of world population poses one of the most fearful threats to the relationship between man and the environment.
The most timid projections of population growth estimate that the current number of the world's inhabitants, 5.5 billion, will double in 35 years.
Such a tremendous figure is not compatible with the earth's available resources, nor with the form in which they are now distributed.
If we bear in mind that the biggest growth in population will be registered in the least developed countries, it does not require a great effort of imagination to picture the impact this will have on the have on living systems, political relations, the economy, and, in the last instance, the stability of the planet itself.

Against this complex panorama, which does not lend itself to easy or close at hand solutions, delegates of 40 governments from Europe and North America (Canada and the USA), i.e., the forty Western countries, met in Geneva in March to agree on a common position before the World Population Conference, which will be held in Cairo in 1994.
The conclusion of the meeting was the same as that repeatedly reached in the population debate over recent decades: a spectacular and worrying paralysis.
The meeting ended with a light recommendation to increase the funds for the birth control programmes in the developing countries.
But neither scientists, technical experts, nor government officials managed to lay on the table the minimal outlines of a significant population containment policy.
The difficulty lies no so much in the economic aspects of the specific programmes aimed at palliating population growth but in the nature of the debate on what should be understood to be excess population.
This is a debate which is tinted by political pressures with different hues according to their origin and in which clearly opposed qualitative and quantitative criteria are combined, paralysing the discussion and the process of decision making.
For the industrialised countries the population problem is a question of numbers and birth rates: if the governments of the most backward countries, where the figures are more spectacular, managed to effectively channel the aid for birth control and undertook massive sex education campaigns (which they are not prepared to do with their respective populations), the rates of growth would possibly start to approach those which are being registered in the most advanced countries.

There are abundant examples to support this thesis in those regions of the world where international organisations and certain governments have allied to put into practice birth control programmes which have managed to stabilise or slightly reduce the growth rates.

However, despite the results obtained, the global tendency has scarcely reflected the impact of these examples.
Perhaps the world population will be 9 instead of 11 billion in 2025.
This is still a figure unsustainable for human society and unbearable for the planet.

The other position, which hardly filtered into the debates in Geneva, but which, as many delegates recognised, is gaining ground in certain schools of demographic thought, undertakes a qualitative analysis of population growth.
Overpopulation does not only mean high birth rates, but also high rates of consumption of resources per capita.
Aggression against the environment does not come from the 800 million Indians, to cite an example, but from the advanced countries, from a country such as France, with less than a tenth the population of India, which consumes approximately the same amount of resources as the Asian country.
Or, to put it another way, the lifestyle budget of a Frenchman for one year is the equivalent to what 10 Indians consume in an entire lifetime.

The population question does not rest, then, on mere population growth, but on the production and consumption of resources.
To be precise, it is to the fact that 20% of the world population (that of the developed countries) consumes 80% of the planet's resources that we can attribute the decrease in population growth rates which have been registered in a persistent manner since the end of the 60s in those countries.
This field of the demographic debate therefore links population growth to poverty and, in consequence, to the decisions adopted by the rich countries to perpetuate it through a structure of trade and consumption which involves a deep imbalance in the distribution and rational use of resources.
As the prestigious scientific magazine Nature put it in an editorial commenting on the Geneva meeting(no. 6419), the cause for concern is not only the growth of the population, but the fact the multinationals have decided not to invest in almost all of Africa and other parts of the world.
The consequences of such a policy will be the constant increase of population in those regions and pressure on the areas of the world where the consumption of resources per capita is ten times greater than in the poor countries.
The nations of the world will have another opportunity to go into this crucial debate in the World Population Conference in Cairo next year.
The prospects are not promising in view of the way the 40 governments of Europe, the USA and Canada meeting in Geneva could not even agree on whether it was worth increasing the funds for the birth control programmes.
And that is the position they believe in.

The ecology of leisure 

Books 

The ecosystems of the entire planet and the modifications introduced by man over the course of history are the subject dealt with by Biosfera in ten volumes.
The editor of the collection is Dr Ramon Folch, biologist and environmental consultant to UNESCO, and it is published by Enciclopèdia Catalana.
The editorial advisory committee is formed by Francesco di Castri, subdirector general of Coordination for Environmental Affairs of UNESCO, Mark Collins, head of the Habitats Data Unit of the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Pere Duran Farell, president of the Catalan chapter of the Club of Rome, Gonzalo Halffler, director of the Institute of Ecology of Mexico, Alpha Oumar Konaré, president of the International Council of Museums and president of the Republic of Mali, and Ramon Margalef, professor emeritus of Ecology in the University of Barcelona.
The writers include top specialists from all over the world.

The first volume has just been published and the second will appear in the autumn.
The work is structured in ten volumes, which will appear at a rate of two a year.
The subjects dealt with by each volume as follows: The Living Planet, Forests, Savannas, Deserts, Mediterranean Regions, Evergreen Forests, Woodlands, Prairies and Taiga, Tundra and Isolated Systems, and Coasts and Oceans.
Each chapter has an alphabetical index and there will be an overall one at the end for the entire ten volumes.

Biosphere is aimed both at professionals in the most diverse fields of the earth and life sciences and teachers, students, ecologists, and the general public interested in these subjects.
It offers an inventory of the flora and fauna of the world, a description of all the ecosystems and an analysis of the relationship between man and the environment paying attention to cultural, social and political aspects.

Biosphere has already won the attention of important publishers in the English, German, French and Italian languages, which means that the Catalan version, which is the first to appear, may well be followed by others.
In addition, there are plans for a television series, an interactive CD version and other items helping to spread its content and message.

Patronised by UNESCO's MAB (Man and Biosphere) programme, the collection already had several thousand subscribers to the Catalan version before the first volume came out.
This is an example of the expectation it has awoken amongst a public which has already made a great response to another collection edited by Ramon Folch and published by Enciclopèdia Catalana: the Història Natural dels Països Catalans .

El repte indefugible Albert Vilalta et al.
Beta Editorial.
Barcelona, 1992 88 pages.

The examination of environmental issues requires the production of tools providing sufficient information about the problems and authoritative reflections on the direction we must take in order to overcome them.
The "Debats mediambientals" collection, promoted by the Department of the Environment, is aimed at offering information and stimulating thought.

The first title in the collection is very expressive: El repte indefugible (The Unavoidable Challenge), with the subtitle Debats mediambientals a la fi del mil leni (Environmental Debates at the End of the Millenium).

The first chapter, The company and environmental management, is written by Albert Vilalta, an engineer of roads, canals and ports.
It deals with the reexamination the company has to make in order to face the challenge of harmonising increasing production with respect for the environment.

The second chapter, written by Ramon Folch, a biologist and environmental consultant of UNESCO, is entitled Environmental ethics, an evolving corollary and, on the one hand, analyses the human activity which has led to the transformation of the environment and, on the other, focuses on the environment as an ethical problem.

The new morality must respect the environment, but it also has to give rise to a greater respect for human beings.

The third chapter, entitled International socioeconomic system and environment, is written by the economist Joan Martínez Alier.
It examines environmental problems from an economic point of view, but draws special attention to the way our vision is too centered on the developed world and offers a point of view oriented towards the underdeveloped world which, in addition, makes up most of the planet, both in area and number of inhabitants.
Finally, the fourth chapter is entitled "The environment in the new international relations" and is written by Ricardo Díez Hochleitner, president of the Club of Rome.
It gives a vision of the new aspects environmental problems are introducing to international relations.
With the cold war over and with the fall of most communist regimes, despite the conflicts still going on in a large part of the world, the environment is the main challenge for attaining a fairer and more habitable planet.
And this leads to a reconsideration of the relations hetween governments.

"The unavoidable challenge" is a work which will make the reader think and help him to acquire a broader vision of the environmental problems we are suffering.

Els residus: Entre el rebuig i La supervivència (Wastes. 
Between Disposal and Survival).
Xavier Domènech.
Ed Barcanova.
Barcelona, 1993. l39 pages 

When we wish emphasise the most serious environmental problems affecting the planet, the same ones come up time and time again.
These include waste and environmental education.
The production of large quantities of waste and the need to recycle them, destroy them or dump them safely is an obvious problem, and the influence of environmental education in creating more correct public attitudes is another.

This book appears to connect the two problems.
On the one hand, it describes the problems surrounding wastes at length.
On the other hand, it is totally accessible to-and recommendable for-a broad public.

Therefore, because of its clear description and the importance of the subject, we think that it could have a positive effect in making the need to decrease the production of wastes and respect the norms being established on source separation felt.

The author, Xavier Domènech, lectures in chemistry at the Autonomous University of Barcelona and, in addition to being an expert on environmental chemistry, has Long been a populariser of science.

Therefore the book is both rigorously scientific and completely accessible.

The exposition covers a great deal of ground and the author has been able to condense it very well into a little more than 100 pages.
The different chapters deal with the problem of wastes in relation to the soil, the sea, the atmosphere, the systems for eliminating them and the problems they create, and the need for international agreements and development of clean technologies.
The book will probably always contain something new for people who already know the subject, but more than anything will offer an excellent vision for those who wish to learn what the challenge of reducing the volume of wastes we produce consists of.

The Story of The Body Shop. 

Cuerpo y alma (Body and Soul) Anita Roddick.

Ediciones B Barcelona, November 1992, 317 pages.

In 1976 Anita Roddick opened the first Body Shop in Brighton.
At the time she knew nothing of the business world.
Today, the company is quoted on the Stock Exchange, is of international dimensions and its success has aroused envy and surprise amongst notable members of the City.

Anita Roddick, with her experience, which she recounts in detail in this entertaining book, has demonstrated that there is another way of doing business and of understanding the company.

The book relates the life of the creator of The Body Shop, the genesis of the company and its particular business philosophy.
For Anita Roddick, commercial practices would improve greatly if people were guided by feminine principles, by qualities such a love, intuition and service to others.

The book also includes criticisms of the false advertising of the cosmetics industry and propose that companies in this area should develop health and well-being instead of promoting an already outdated ideal of beauty and false hopes.

The autobiography of Anita Roddick is full of fresh air, of exciting, provocative ideas.
The success of The Body Shop demonstrates that the market gives its confidence to ecological products if they really are well made and fulfil the expectations of consumers.

The Influence of Turbulence of Chemical Reactions in the Atmospheric Boundary layer .
Jordi Vilà-Guerau de Arellano University of Utrecht, 1992, 137 pages.

The chemistry of the atmosphere is highly complex and in order to understand the behaviour of the pollutants we launch into the air it is necessary to study many factors and draw up highly accurate models.

This is the subject dealt with by Dr.
Jordi Vilà-Guerau de Arellano in his doctoral thesis.

Vilà-Guerau is currently a researcher at the Institute of Marine Research of the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands, where he is studying the influence of clouds in climate change.

The thesis that Dr.
Vilà-Guerau presented in 1992 has been published by the University of Utrecht, with a grant from the CIRIT (Interdepartmental Commission for Research and Technological Innovation of the Generalitat of Catalonia).
The thesis deals with the influence of the turbulence on chemical reactions in the atmosphere.
The increase of industrial and agricultural activities and transport all over the world has led to an increase in the number of chemical compounds in the atmosphere.
The Study refers basically to certain processes, in particular those through which atmospheric turbulence influences the chemical reactions of minority gases.

The models we take in order to study atmospheric pollution are classified according to their extension, local, urban, regional or continental and global.
The effects produced by the emission, combination and elimination of the substances are called subnet since the spatial and temporal scales of these processes are smaller than the size of the net.

Vilà-Guerau has studied the description of subnet processes and their introduction to the models with the chemical system NO-O3-NO2, one of those mainly responsible for the formation of ozone in the lower atmosphere.

The thesis is structured in 8 chapters and contains summaries in Dutch, Catalan and Spanish.

The Treaties of the International Forum of Non Governmental Organisations. 
Commitments for the Future International Forum, 1993,148 pages.

In addition to the official summit, Rio de Janeiro saw an alternative summit in which the NGOs (non governmental organisations) participated.
The treaties approved in this meeting have just been published in Catalan in collaboration with Alternativa Verde, the UNESCO Centre of Catalonia, the College of Biologists, DEPANA, Integral and Intermón, and with the support of the Department of the Environment of the Generalitat of Catalonia.

The International Forum of Non Governmental Organisations and Social Movements-the Global Forum '92- gathered together more than 25,000 people from more than 11,000 NGOs from 171 countries.
More than 360 meetings gave rise to these documents.

The book is divided into seven chapters, General Declaration and Principles, Cooperation between NGOs and Reinforcement of Structures, Alternative Economic Issues, Global Environmental Issues, Sea and Ocean Issues, Pood Production and Intersectorial Issues.
In total, 45 treaties and declarations from the Declaration of the Peoples of the Earth, the Rio de Janeiro Declaration and the Earth Charter to the Treaty on Indigenous Peoples and NGOs, via the most diverse themes.
The collection reveals the vitality of the NGOs and their broad vision of environmental problems at planetary level.
