
Wastewater Reuse: 

Ever more a resource for the future 

Issue: 

due to the increasing pressure on water resources in many areas of the world, issues of reliability of water supplies are becoming acute.
As a consequence wastewater reuse is being developed, mainly for irrigation.

Relevance: 

in spite of the fact that technology exists to make wastewater reuse safe, the development of wastewater reuse is raising public health concerns and generating hot debates about microbiological quality standards.
Many developing countries do not have the know-how nor the financial means to apply this technology systematically.

Differences in standards and in the practice of wastewater reuse in different countries create distortions in its acceptance.
This raises a number of issues ranging from the public health of local populations, to international competition for tourism or exports of fruit and vegetables.

Population, economic growth and industrial demands are creating acute water shortages in many areas of the world.

In spite of being sufficient on a global scale to satisfy human needs, freshwater resources are unequally distributed in time and space, creating local difficulties in water supply.
Additionally, in the last few years, and besides the occurrence of local droughts, a combination of increasing irrigation to satisfy the food needs of a growing population, economic growth and industrial demands have created acute water shortages in many regions of the world.
In industrialized countries, while drinking water treatment is becoming more and more expensive due to pervasive pollution, the quality of wastewater effluents is steadily improving, sometimes exceeding the quality of the receiving streams.
In this context, as existing natural water resources reach their limits or are polluted in an ever-larger number of regions, wastewater reuse is becoming one option to make ends meet.
This raises the issue of the reliability, quality and public acceptance of water supplies.

Wastewater reuse applications 

Wastewater reuse applications are essentially of five types: 

- Agricultural and landscape irrigation
- Groundwater recharge
- Industrial water recycling 
- River flow augmentation, aquaculture and other ecological uses; and 
- Reuse as potable water

Wastewater reuse can also be entirely controlled (Òpipe to pipeÓ) or occur after blending with non-reclaimed water (e.g. after groundwater recharge).
All applications require wastewater treatment prior to reuse and each may need to meet a variety of quality requirements.

In industrialized countries, the increasing cost of water and wastewater treatment due to pervasive pollution, coupled to ever higher quality requirements for wastewater treatment, make the treated effluents increasingly attractive for reuse.
In developing countries, wastewater reuse presents the triple advantage of preserving water resources, avoiding pollution and avoiding adverse public health impacts.
Thanks to this, and to its high reliability as a water supply, wastewater reuse is now joining the mainstream within water supply strategies.

Irrigation: the main form of wastewater reuse 

Europe faces local water shortages, environmental constraints and pervasive pollution.

Serious research on wastewater reuse is being carried out in places as diverse as the USA, Australia, the Middle East (especially Jordan and Israel), the Maghreb and Southern Africa, to cite only a few.

Due to its generally abundant water resources, Europe has so far not invested heavily in this issue.

However, this general situation hides very diverse realities as the recent acute drought in Spain is reminding us.
Besides local water shortages, increasing environmental constraints and pervasive pollution everywhere in Europe are generating renewed interest in this practice.
Because irrigation accounts for by far the largest use of water in the world, and the quality requirements are among the easiest to achieve along with a few industrial uses, it is the largest reuse application in terms of volume.
In the future, because of an increasingly urban world population, its proximity to wastewater, the existence of suitable technologies and the general increase in the quality of wastewater effluents, potable reuse could become increasingly popular.
However, this raises issues such as its now apparently high cost, process reliability and public acceptance.
Other reuses now appearing in cities are non-potable household uses through secondary water distribution piping networks (e.g. toilet flushing, car washing, garden irrigation,...).
Examples exist in Tokyo, St Petersburg and Florida (USA)..
This type of application is limited by the costs of installation of a double piping network and the dangers of cross-connection to the drinking water supply.

Secondary non-potable water distribution networks are being tried for the domestic reuse of treated wastewater but the installation costs are high.

Quality requirements 

Treatment technologies exist to reach any desired water quality .

Since wastewater reuse is usually practiced as a water supply strategy, the reuse application dictates the required water quality, which in turn will determine the treatment technology needed (and the associated cost).
Treatment technologies exist to reach any desired water quality.
Wastewater reuse is exceptionally carried out for sanitation purposes, mainly in Europe.

Therefore, every type of wastewater reuse calls for its own quality standards.
Industrial reuse specifications are non-controversial since the necessary water quality is determined by the industrial process requirements.
The economics of the operation are industry specific.
Potable water standards are not very controversial but process reliability, public acceptance and trace pollutant issues have so far limited potable reuse to extreme cases.
Because groundwater recharge also provides a form of water treatment that has been shown to be efficient, discussions around recharged water quality remain usually limited to nutrient levels (phosphates and nitrates) and pesticide residues requirements in the case of percolation.
Direct injection recharge has higher quality requirements because of potential clogging of the installations.

Process reliability, public acceptance and trace pollutant issues have so far limited potable reuse to extreme cases.

Microbiological quality standards 

Debates on microbiological quality standards reflect the priorities of wealthier countries rather than poorer ones.

While wastewater is an attractive source of water for irrigation thanks to its fertilizing capacity, the microbiological quality standards applicable according to the type of irrigation practiced and the type of crop irrigated are currently hotly disputed.
The issues are essentially confined to "unrestricted" irrigation (vegetables that can be consumed raw, sports fields,...).
Many industrialized countries, especially the USA (led by California), and providers of technology usually promote a stringent stance (comparable to drinking water), confident that the most expensive technology provides safe enough water (i.e. free of enteric viruses and parasites) for those who can afford it.
However, developing countries with severe water shortages call for epidemiological studies to defend existing, less stringent WHO quality guidelines.
Viruses are difficult (and expensive) to monitor.
Therefore, the WHO guidelines, prepared with the needs of developing countries in mind, only prescribe a limit for faecal coliforms ( xxx ) and eggs of intestinal nematodes ( xxx ).
Faecal coliforms are used as indicators of the potential presence of viruses.
As a consequence, the whole argument revolves around the validity of such limits as a sufficient guarantee of safety for the water used in irrigation.
One must also realise that in the cases where raw wastewater is directly reused, the WHO guidelines are already a major step forward.
For example, while not covering viruses nor faecal streptococci , they are more stringent than the European standard for bathing water on faecal coliforms ( xxx ).

Epidemiological studies are notoriously difficult to carry out and their results difficult to interpret.

Besides the strictly statistical questions they raise, it is always extremely difficult to single out a parameter to determine a clear cause/effect relationship.
Additionally, immunity build up and variability of sensitivity between human populations render results difficult to extrapolate or transpose.

Economic and social aspects 

These questions are very relevant and the stakes are high for four main reasons:

In some countries direct reuse of raw or poorly treated wastewater for irrigation is common.

1. In many developing countries with water shortages, the direct reuse of raw or poorly treated wastewater for irrigation is common (e.g. Morocco).
This is causing serious public health problems weighing on the well-being of local populations and on the local economy.
A high rate of morbidity decreases productivity (e.g. diverts resources to take care of the sick) and generates healthcare costs.

In dry areas, the increasing demand and higher standards imposed by tourism puts pressure on water supply.

2. The tourism sector is increasing worldwide and becoming more international.

Developing countries are attractive destinations and international tour operators take advantage of favorable local conditions to establish hotels and vacation villages which can often be a significant source of income for the host countries.
In their large majority, tourists come from industrialized countries where water quality is good.
If diseases spread in their holiday destinations due to low water quality and contaminated fruit and vegetables, they will not return and will generate bad publicity.
Thus, the economic stakes can be high both for the tour operators and the host countries.

In sunny areas of industrialized countries, which are often short of water in the summer, the problem is rather different.
Water demand is highest during the dry months of the year.
Wastewater reuse can therefore be called on to bridge the gap.
It is becoming an increasingly attractive alternative as the quality of wastewater treatment is on the rise, at least in Europe.
This practice may have the added benefit of decreasing wastewater discharges to surface waters at a time when the dilution of pollutants in rivers is at its yearly minimum and the risk of acute impact is high.
This is particularly relevant for Spain with its large tourism industry concentrated in areas with insufficient water supplies.

Standard setting influences, and is influenced by, the relative position of fresh produce exporters.

3. The microbiological quality of irrigation water from reuse may also have other economic aspects.
Southern Mediterranean countries have sizeable raw fruit and vegetables export markets towards Europe.
This requires a good sanitary quality of the produce being exported.
Since these productions are usually irrigated, the issue of microbiological quality of the irrigation water is relevant [1] ).
Israel, with relatively high financial and technological capabilities in comparison to the Maghreb countries, is favorable to stringent irrigation water standards, hoping to gain a commercial advantage over Algeria or Morocco, which are as yet unable to match systematically these standards in the race towards the export of fresh vegetables to Europe.

Tunisia has a clear water use policy forbidding wastewater reuse for the irrigation of produce to be consumed raw.
The same question could be raised within Europe if irrigation with reused wastewater increases in countries such as Spain and the applicable water quality standards do not have a pan-European acceptance.

4. All these issues are creating a potentially large global water and wastewater treatment technology market, where American and European technology suppliers are the main competitors.
Thanks to the involvement of many European experts in projects for developing countries, in particular in the Southern Mediterranean region, wastewater reuse can be a way to increase cooperation between Europe and these countries.

Need for appropriate technologies and further research 

As a consequence, there is a need to increase our epidemiological knowledge on the health impact of reused wastewater both for agricultural workers and for consumer markets.
This could lead to the determination of a widely-accepted minimum standard for wastewater reuse in irrigation and clarify the controversy around the existing WHO guidelines.

While substantial effort has been invested in the development of wastewater treatment technologies, more effort is needed to develop inexpensive, safe and reliable technologies adapted to the developing world.
This could go hand in hand with the training of competent personnel.
In the case of wastewater reuse, the issue of reliability is also applicable to industrialized countries and may modify the relative preferences for wastewater treatment technologies.
However, this work must be carried out in coordination with the development of the standards in order to determine the best cost/benefit balance for every geography.
More research is needed to study the public health relevance of water quality standards for irrigation.
All these developments would benefit from a framework policy on wastewater reuse developed at European level, helping wastewater reuse to prosper in the Mediterranean basin, a densely populated region with serious water resource limitations.

Keywords: 

Wastewater reuse, public health, epidemiological studies, developing countries, irrigation, water standards, Mediterranean region

[1] not so much for citrus because they are under "restricted" irrigation, more for strawberries, tomatoes, etc.
