
COMMUNICATION TO THE COUNCIL AND THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT on a Community strategy to combat acidification 

Proposal for a COUNCIL DIRECTIVE relating to a reduction of the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels and amending Directive 93/12/EEC 

Proposal for a COUNCIL DECISION on the conclusion by the European Community of the Protocol to the 1979 Convention on long-range transboundary air pollution on further reductions of sulphur emissions 

Communication to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community strategy to combat acidification 

INTRODUCTION 

In December 1995, the Environment Council requested the Commission to develop a coherent acidification strategy, to be presented to the Council in the beginning of 1997.
This decision followed the publication in November 1995 of a Commission staff working paper on acidification.
The working paper showed that, while considerable progress has been made, current and planned legislation was not sufficient to achieve the long-term goal of "no exceeding ever of critical loads and levels" of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme.

This Communication is a response to the request from the Council.

It briefly reviews the problem of acidification and the methodology which the Commission has used to develop a cost-effective strategy to combat acidification.
It then goes on to describe the major elements in that strategy.

BACKGROUND 

The problem of acidification 

For the purpose of this strategy, acidification means effects of the introduction of acidifying substances into the environment by means of atmospheric deposition.
- sulphur dioxide ( SO2 ), emitted mainly from the combustion of coal and oil;
- nitrogen oxides ( NOx ), chiefly from motor vehicles and other combustion processes; and
- ammonia ( NH3 ), principally from agricultural activities.


The emissions divided by sector for the EC15 are shown in Table 1, and the emissions country-by-country in 1990 are given in Table 2.

Table 1

Emissions of acidifying pollutants, by sector, 1990, European Community

These acidifying substances can be carried by winds for hundreds and even thousands of kilometres before being deposited in the environment.
While still in the atmosphere, the sulphur dioxide can be transformed into sulphuric acid, and the nitrogen oxides to nitric acid.
When deposited on vegetation, soil, and water, they cause acidification, which has extensive biological effects on both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, greatly changing and impoverishing them by reducing the diversity of plant and animal species.

Acidification of the soil leads to the leaching out of plant nutrients, such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium, which in the long term may cause nutrient deficiencies, thus threatening the productivity of forest soils.
The process of acidification also results in increased concentrations of aluminium and other toxic metals in the soils, ground water, and surface waters.
The biodiversity of lakes and rivers is drastically impoverished in areas affected by surface water acidification.
Acidified ground water can cause problems, for instance by corroding pipe-work, but also by creating health risks as the acidification increases the mobility of various harmful metals, such as aluminium, mercury, copper, zinc, cadmium, and lead.
Acid deposition accelerates the rate of deterioration of building materials as well as objects of art and cultural heritage, particularly in urban areas.

Table 2

Emissions of SO2 , NOx and NH3 1990 (thousand tonnes)

The effects of acid deposition vary geographically, depending primarily on the sensitivity of the receptor (e.g. an ecosystem) in question, and the amount of acid deposition.
The critical load indicates the sensitivity of a particular environment by defining how much exposure to pollution it can tolerate before long-lasting or other significant damage occurs.
Critical loads are set for natural and semi-natural ecosystems, such as forest soils, heathlands, and surface waters, i.e. excluding e.g. managed farmland and built-up areas.
The concept of critical loads is science-based.
Consequently, the data used reflects current best knowledge and includes a certain level of uncertainty.
Critical loads have a significance for sustainable development, since depositions above the critical loads are not sustainable in the long term.

The sensitivity to acid deposition varies greatly between different areas and ecosystems.
The areas in the European Community where critical loads for acidity are the lowest - i.e. those containing the most sensitive ecosystems - tend to be in the northern part of the region, including Sweden, Finland, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Germany.

Acidification is determined by the total deposition of acidifying pollutants relative to the critical load for a particular environment.
Any reduction in acidifying depositions will reduce acidification, but acidification will not stop, and thus sustainable recovery will not take place, until depositions are brought down to levels where the critical loads no longer are exceeded.
In fact, as a result of the historically accumulated acidification effects in soils, recovery may for some areas take decades or even hundreds of years.
The speed of recovery is dependent primarily on ecosystem characteristics and on how quickly the depositions are reduced - the sooner depositions are brought down to below critical loads, the quicker the recovery.

In 1990, the critical loads for acidification were exceeded over an area of more than 32 million hectares in the Member States.
In terms of absolute area exceeded, the countries worst affected were Sweden (10 million hectares), Germany (7 million hectares), and Finland (5 million hectares) (see Table 5).
As indicated above, the damage caused by acidification involves reduced biodiversity in terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, which in turn affects e.g. amenity and recreational values.
The impoverishment of the soil nutrient status may in the longer term result in reduced forest productivity.
While it is possible to identify and quantify the areas affected or at risk with a relative high level of certainty, there is still large uncertainty as regards the quantification in economic terms of the damage and the long-term risks caused by acidification.

Other effects of acidifying pollutants 

Although the focus of this strategy is on acidification (as acid deposition), it is important to note that airborne emissions of the mentioned acidifying pollutants have other detrimental effects on the environment.
In particular, ambient concentrations of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide have been shown to have deleterious effects on human health, especially for people susceptible to respiratory problems, such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema.

They also contribute to corrosion of buildings and materials.
There is increasing evidence that small acid particles, which are secondary products of emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxides, affect lung function.
Nitrogen oxides are also a major precursor of ground-level ozone ( O3 ), an aggressive pollutant which can damage human health, vegetation, and organic materials, and reduce visibility.
Deposition of nitrogen compounds, emanating from emissions of nitrogen oxides and ammonia, can act as fertilizer, thus contributing to eutrophication of terrestrial, freshwater, and marine ecosystems, affecting among others the biological diversity of these ecosystems.

Consequently, the benefits of reducing emissions of acidifying air pollutants relate not solely to reduced acidification damage, but are substantially wider, i.e. includes improved health, reduced mortality and/or morbidity, lessened corrosion of buildings and material, better protection of the cultural heritage, less eutrophication, improved visibility, etc.
Some of these benefits (e.g. impacts on health and corrosion) can with some degree of certainty be quantified in monetary terms (see section 6), while others (e.g. the ecological impacts) can not that easily be monetized.
In order to show the ecological benefits of emission reductions, the change in the area of sensitive ecosystems where critical loads are no longer being exceeded can be estimated.

Existing EC legislation on acidifying air pollutants 

There is a large range of instruments by which emissions of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are controlled at Community level, but so far none dealing specifically with emissions of ammonia.
Some of the existing instruments were largely designed to help combat acidification, while others have been developed primarily for other reasons.
The key instruments, either in force or proposed, are shown in figure 1 on the next page.

In addition to the measures adopted at the level of the Community, many Member States have introduced national measures to bring about even further reductions in acidifying emissions.

The UN ECE/CLRTAP 

The Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) was signed in 1979.
The secretariat of the Convention is run by and located at the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UN ECE), in Geneva.
Of the present 55 member states of the UN ECE, 40 are parties to the convention, including all the member states as well as the European Community.
Since coming into force in 1983, the convention has been extended by five specific protocols, four of which prescribe objectives and measures to control and reduce emissions of transboundary air pollution.
Three of these relate to acidifying air pollutants:
The two sulphur protocols, from 1985 and 1994, and the 1988 NOx Protocol.
The fourth aims at reducing emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), with the aim of lowering concentrations of ground-level ozone.

In 1993, the Community acceded to the 1988 NOx Protocol.

Twelve Member States have ratified, two have signed but not ratified, and one has not signed this protocol.
As regards the 1994 Sulphur Protocol, fourteen member states, as well as the Community has signed it.
As yet only four member states have ratified it (see section 4.2).

In the late 1980s, the convention started to develop the so-called critical loads approach as a tool for developing effects-based and cost-effective abatement strategies.
This approach was used when negotiating the 1994 sulphur protocol, and is also being used for the ongoing negotiations on a new multi-effects and multi- pollutants protocol - an agreement that addresses the effects of ground-level ozone, acidification, and eutrophication, and the pollutants nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, and ammonia.
This new protocol is expected to be finalized during 1998, and once it enters into force will supersede the existing VOC and NOx Protocols.
In practice, however, the basic obligations of existing protocols are being maintained.
Moreover, the CLRTAP process plays an important role in generating information, exchanging of data, and in raising knowledge and awareness.

Figure 1

Existing Community legislation relevant to the reduction of acidifying emissions

The Council Directive 88/609/EEC on the limitation of emission of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants:
This was adopted by the Council in November 1988, and applies to combustion plants with a thermal input of 50 megawatts (MW) or more.
It includes emission limit values for new (post-1987) plants, and country-by-country ceilings for national total emissions from existing (pre-1987) plants.
These emission ceilings are gradually reduced in several steps over time.

Presently, the Commission is preparing a revision of the Directive, as requested by provisions in the original Directive.
The proposal for revision is expected to be finalized by the Commission by autumn 1997.

The Council Directive 93/12/EEC relating to the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels:
This sets limits of the maximum sulphur content, to 0.2% for gas oils used in stationary combustion sources, and to 0.05% for diesel fuels used in mobile sources.
A provision for the revision, prescribing a lower limit for gas oils used for stationary combustion, is contained in the original Directive.

Legislation relating to control of emissions from mobile sources:
There exists an extensive body of Community legislation for the control of atmospheric emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles (Directive 70/220/EEC as amended) and heavy duty vehicles (Directive 88/77/EEC as amended).

In June 1996 the Commission adopted a strategy for the further control of road transport emissions (COM(96)248 final).
This strategy foresees that NOx emissions from road transport will be reduced by 65% in 2010 as compared to 1995.
With regard to other mobile sources of acidifying emissions, in 1995 the Commission put forward a proposal for the control of emissions from non-road mobile machinery (COM(95) 350 final).

The framework Directive 96/61/EC on integrated pollution prevention and control (IPPC):
This was adopted by the Council in September 1996, and will require the application of best available techniques (BATs), as defined in this Directive, adapted to local circumstances and taking into account contribution to transboundary air pollution, at every existing installation covered by the Directive by the year 2007, and at new installations as from 1999.

Air quality Directives for among others SO2 , NO2 , particulates, and ozone:
Under the framework of Directive 96/62/EC on ambient air quality assessment and management, the Commission is currently preparing new air quality limit values for SO2 , NO2 , and particulates, and a proposal for a new Directive for these is expected in the first half of 1997.
A proposal for revision of Council Directive 92/72/EEC on air pollution by ozone, as well as a Community strategy to reduce ozone precursors, is due early 1998.

DEVELOPING THE STRATEGY 

The scientific basis for the strategy 

Responding to the mandate given by the Council, the Commission working together with its contractor (the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)), has carried out a detailed scientific assessment to provide a sound technical foundation upon which to build a strategy for combating acidification in the European Community.
The data used in carrying out the analysis as well as the models for integrated assessment are the same as those used to support the development of protocols under the UN ECE/CLRTAP.
In this way it was assured that the Commission's strategy would be consistent with ongoing work in the UN ECE.
1 the predicted evolution in the emissions of acidifying substances, taking into account the impact of existing and forthcoming legislation at the level of the Community as well as legislative actions and plans announced by the individual Member States;
2 the transboundary nature of the acidification problem, by using internationally agreed data on emissions, transboundary fluxes, and depositions of the acidifying air pollutants;
3 the identification of cost-effective strategies to combat acidification taking into account changing patterns in emissions, the differences in critical loads across the Community and the cost of different abatement measures;
4 the potential impact of abatement measures taken outside the territory of the EC;
5 the impact on related environmental phenomena such as eutrophication and tropospheric ozone formation.


A description of the scientific analysis which was carried out to support the development of the acidification strategy is presented in the Annex to this Communication.
However, before going on to describe the elements in the Commission's proposed strategy it is necessary to draw attention to a number of important considerations.

The ultimate target of no exceedance of critical loads and need for interimtargets 

The Council conclusions of December 1995 recognized the difficulty of meeting the ultimate objective of no exceedance of critical loads in the immediate future.
It therefore invited the Commission to identify interim targets on the path to reaching that goal.
The analysis verified the need for setting interim targets.
A given policy constraint for the strategy is that measures to reduce emissions must primarily take place within the EC, since the EC can not impose legally binding commitments/measures outside of its territory.
The analysis showed that even when assuming the application of current best available technologies to all emission sources in the whole of Europe, it would not be possible to reach the long-term environmental quality target for the whole of the EC by 2010.

Using a so-called gap-closure approach, various possible interim targets were analysed.
A similar approach was used in the negotiations for the 1994 Sulphur Protocol under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution.
Due to the more complex critical loads now used - involving both sulphur and nitrogen compounds, as compared to sulphur only in the sulphur protocol - the gap closure now applied is based on ecosystem protection data.

Consequently, the concept applied aims at a stepwise closing of the gap, that is the difference, between the level of ecosystem protection in 1990 and the ultimate target of 100% ecosystem protection, by a certain percentage.

After thorough analysis of several options, it was found appropriate to aim at a 50% gap closure.
This should, with present knowledge, in the most cost-effective manner for the EC as a whole, reduce the area of sensitive ecosystems in which critical loads were exceeded in 1990, by at least 50% in the different regions of the member states.
The main motive for selecting this interim environmental quality target is that it represents a good balance between ecosystem protection and costs:
at levels of gap closure above 50% the additional costs of emission reduction increase very rapidly.
The Commission considers that the interim environmental target of 50% gap closure should be achieved by 2010.

The interim target will be reviewed in 2004, as part of the review process (see section 4.12).

A more detailed explanation of the concept of gap closure and the rationale for selecting an interim target of 50% gap closure are presented in the Annex.

Preliminary assessment of the emission reductions necessary to achieve the 50% gap closure target 

The Commission, working with IIASA, has carried out an analysis of the most cost-effective approach for achieving the interim target of 50% gap closure by 2010.
This analysis takes into account the transboundary fluxes in atmospheric pollutants across the Community and the costs for each country associated with reducing the emissions of the three pollutants SO2 , NOx , and NH3 .
The output from the analysis is the global, least- cost solution for the whole Community in order to achieve the 50% gap closure target.
A summary of the preliminary results from the analysis are shown in Table 3, and more detailed results are presented in the Annex.

Table 3

Summary of the emission levels for the Community which will be necessary to achieve the 50% gap closure target as compared to 1990 and the predicted situation in 2010 on the basis of current plans (million tonnes)

Assumptions concerning energy use and CO2 emissions 

In carrying out the scientific analysis underlying the strategy, certain assumptions had to be made with regard to energy use.
Given that energy production and the associated combustion of coal and liquid petroleum products is one of the most important sources of acidifying emissions, these assumptions had a significant impact upon the acidification strategy, particularly in relation to the identification of least-cost solutions.
It was also clear that assumptions concerning energy consumption should take into account the need to reduce CO2 emissions in the light of concerns relating to global warming.

The analysis upon which the acidification strategy was developed, is based on the so-called conventional wisdom scenario, which envisages a 20% increase in energy consumption and a 10% increase in CO2 emissions between 1990 and 2010.
However, an additional analysis was also carried out using an alternative scenario based on the assumption that CO2 emissions would be reduced by 10% in 2010, as compared to 1990.
The results show that under such assumptions the expenditures on abatement measures for attaining the interim target of a 50% gap closure could be substantially reduced (see Annex).

Collaboration with the UN ECE/CLRTAP 

The Council recognized that international cooperation and coordination were necessary to reach the goal of no exceedance of critical loads, and considered it essential that future Community strategies were developed taking full account of the work of the UN ECE/CLRTAP.
The Council also stated that when preparing the acidification strategy, the Commission should have regular contact with among others the UN ECE/CLRTAP.

Following bilateral consultations between the Commission and the UN ECE/CLRTAP in April 1996, a steering group of key people from the two institutions was formed, with the main task to facilitate coordination.
Formal meetings of the steering group have taken place in July and November, and informal consultations are carried out on a continuous basis.

THE STRATEGY 

On the basis of the results from the scientific analysis described above, taking into account the observations made by member states, and noting those made by the industry and the NGOs, during the course of three meetings held on 29 May 1996, 31 October 1996, and 16 January 1997, the Commission has developed a strategy for combating acidification in the European Community.

If the measures which are proposed as part of the strategy are implemented, this will allow the attainment by 2010 of the interim target of 50% gap closure, as described in section 3.2.
The proposed measures will lead to further emission reductions as compared to those expected to result from current legislation and commitments, which are estimated to reduce Community-wide emissions of SO2 , NOx , and NH3 by 66, 48, and 15% respectively, between 1990 and 2010.

However, the long-term environmental objective is no exceeding ever of critical loads.
With this in mind, the Commission's proposed strategy also foresees an ongoing review process to both monitor the impact of the measures to be introduced and to assess the need for and the nature of additional measures to reduce acidifying emissions.
The key elements in the strategy are as follows:

Proposal for national emission ceilings 

The Commission considers that the Community's future policy with regard to acidification and related transboundary phenomena, such as tropospheric ozone, should be based on national emission ceilings for a number of key pollutants.
These national emission ceilings should be compatible with the achievement of agreed environmental objectives.
The elaboration of national emission ceilings is consistent with the approach which has been taken in the context of the UN ECE Convention on Long- Range Transboundary Air Pollution.
One of the advantages of a policy which is based upon emission ceilings is that it allows a significant degree of flexibility for member states to determine how the ceilings are to be achieved in the most cost-effective way.
It is understood that measures taken by member states would need to be compatible with Community rules governing the functioning of the internal market and competition.
Member states could for example implement economic instruments or other non-technical measures as additional tools as part of their national strategies to meet the emission ceilings.

As stated above, the quantification of national emission ceilings is dependent upon the prior definition of the environmental objective.
With regard to acidification, the Commission considers that an appropriate medium-term objective is the achievement by 2010 of the 50% gap closure interim target (see section 3.2).

The scientific analysis carried out by the Commission has provided preliminary information concerning the emission reductions which would be necessary to achieve the interim target of 50% gap closure (see section 3.3 and the Annex).
The Commission would stress the preliminary nature of these figures which will be reviewed in the light of the ozone strategy (see below) and further refinements to the scientific analysis.

However, it is clear that the achievement of the 50% gap closure target will present a significant challenge over and above the efforts that the member states are already making to reduce their acidifying emissions.

Tropospheric ozone is another type of transboundary pollution which requires an integrated response at the level of the Community.
It is foreseen that by the beginning of 1998 the Commission will come forward with a proposal for a Community strategy to combat this type of pollution.
The Commission, working with its contractor IIASA, is currently carrying out the scientific analyses necessary to develop its proposed strategy.
These analyses will be based on the same methodology which has been used to develop the present strategy to combat acidification.
It is foreseen that the scientific analysis will allow the definition of national emission ceilings for NOx and Volatile Organic Compounds, which are the pollutants primarily responsible for the formation of tropospheric ozone.

1 of the refinements to the analysis relating to acidification;
2 the completion of the analysis relating to tropospheric ozone;
3 further discussions with experts from the Member States, industry and NGOs;
4 the progress of discussions related to the finalization of a new protocol in the context of the UN ECE Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, as well as the planned revision of the International Maritime Organization's (IMO) Convention on Maritime Pollution (MARPOL),
the Commission will come forward with a proposal for a Directive establishing national emission ceilings for SO2 , NOx , NH3 , and VOCs, consistent with the attainment of the 50% gap closure target for acidification and the achievement of agreed air quality objectives for tropospheric ozone.
In drawing up these emission ceilings, the Commission will have regard to the consequences of the proposed ceilings for the economic and social development of specific regions in the Community.

Even though the introduction of binding national emissions ceilings is a major new initiative, it is only one part of the acidification strategy.
It is proposed that the emission ceilings are complemented by a number of other actions (see below), that will help ensure both that the emission ceilings will be attained in practice, and that cost- effective technical measures to reduce emissions are taken within and outside the European Community.

Ratification of the 1994 Sulphur Protocol 

With the exception of Portugal, all member states, as well as the European Community, have signed the 1994 Sulphur Protocol to the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution.
Moreover, the following non-EC countries have so far signed it:
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Norway, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, and Ukraine.
By December 1996, however, only four Member States (Sweden, Netherlands, Luxembourg, and the UK), and one non-EC country (Norway) had ratified it.
For the protocol to enter into force it must be ratified by 16 of the signatories.

If the Community is intent upon the development of an ambitious policy to combat acidification, then one of the first steps which should be taken is the ratification of the 1994 Sulphur Protocol:
before deciding upon additional measures to reduce acidifying emissions the Community should demonstrate its commitment with regard to existing international undertakings.
Moreover, the protocol contains provisions for future reviews, which provide the opportunity for more far-reaching commitments that could further contribute to meet the environmental quality targets of the Community.

In addition to the political significance of the Community ratifying the 1994 Sulphur Protocol, there is a clear benefit to be gained for the Community in that the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution is currently the most effective mechanism for bringing about emission reductions in those non-EC countries which contribute significantly to acid deposition within the EC.

It is therefore proposed that the Council should decide that the European Community ratify the Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution on Further Reduction of Sulphur Emissions.

A proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion by the European Community of the 1994 Sulphur Protocol is attached.

Proposal for revision of the Directive on the sulphur content of certain liquidfuels 

In March 1993, the Council adopted Directive 93/12/EEC relating to the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels.
Here, the maximum sulphur content of diesel fuels was set at 0.2% by weight as from 1 October 1994, and reduced to a maximum of 0.05% as from 1 October 1996.
The maximum sulphur content of gas oils other than diesel fuels was set at 0.2% by weight as from 1 October 1994.
In Article 2 of that Directive, the Commission was requested to report on progress made in controlling sulphur dioxide emissions, and to submit a proposal prescribing a lower limit for the sulphur content of gas oils, other than diesel fuels.
This proposal was postponed pending the outcome of the acidification strategy.

In the analysis carried out for the purpose of developing the acidification strategy, it was found that a further reduction in the sulphur content of gas oils used in stationary combustion sources was a cost-effective measure - or was in fact already being applied in practice - for eight Member States:
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Sweden, and the UK. (In Austria and Finland, the maximum sulphur content allowed at present is 0.1%.
These two countries have a derogation allowing for this in their Accession Treaty with the EC, lasting over the transition period of four years, ending by 31 December 1998.) In all other Member States a further reduction of the sulphur content in gas oils below the current limit value of 0.2% sulphur is not cost-effective for the purpose solely to meet the interim acidification goals.

The combustion of heavy fuel oils is the dominating source of SO2 emissions from the use of liquid fuels, their relative share of total EC emissions in 1990 being about 20%.
In the absence of targeted measures, by 2010 it is estimated that this share would increase to nearly 40%.
The emissions of SO2 from heavy fuel oils come from a number of varying sources (see Table 4).

Table

Emissions of SO2 from heavy fuel oils (HFO) in 2010 according to the reference scenario, and after limiting the sulphur content to 1% (kilotonnes)

The analysis for the acidification strategy showed that for 12 Member States (the exceptions being Spain, Portugal and Greece) the use of low- sulphur heavy fuel oil in certain sectors e.g. transport and domestic use, was a cost-effective abatement option to meet the interim target.

However, in other sectors such as power plants and industry the application of flue gas desulphurization was generally more cost effective and also more effective in removing emissions.

Given that the combustion of heavy fuel oils contributes significantly to emissions of SO2 , the Commission considers it appropriate as part of its strategy to combat acidification to reduce emissions of SO2 from this source by placing limits on the sulphur content allowed in heavy fuel oil.
In order to reflect the conclusions from the integrated assessment and to avoid non-cost-effective expenditure, the Commission recognizes that in some countries/regions where environmental conditions allow, and in some industries which already apply abatement technologies (such as flue gas desulphurization) which give equivalent or superior results in terms of reduced SO2 emissions, it will be necessary to provide for derogations to any general limit on the sulphur content.
In particular, any rules relating to heavy fuel oils should take account of and be consistent with the provisions of Directive 88/609/EEC on emissions from large combustion plants and the proposed amendment to that Directive (see section 4.4 below).
With regard to the revision of Directive 88/609/EEC, it is currently foreseen that this will include provisions such as emission ceilings (similar to the concept included in this Directive) which afford large combustion plants a degree of flexibility with regard to the sulphur content of the heavy fuel oils they are using.

A proposal for a Council Directive relating to the sulphur content of gas oils and heavy fuel oils, and incorporating the principles set out in the paragraphs above, is attached to this Communication.

As regards the control of the sulphur content of marine bunker oils this is dealt with in section 4.5 below.

Action related to the LCP and IPPC Directives: controlling emissions from stationary sources 

New emission limit values for SO2 and NOx for all new large combustion plants are currently being prepared by the Commission in the process of revision of Directive 88/609/EEC on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants (the LCP Directive).
The new emission limit values will be based on so- called BATs (Best Available Techniques) for air pollution control.
As part of the preparatory work for the revision of Directive 88/609/EEC, the Commission services are examining inter alia the potential value of establishing national emission ceilings for both new and existing plants.

Such emission ceilings are motivated by the need to ensure both cost-effectiveness and attainment of environment quality targets.
A study carried out for the purpose of the revision of the LCP Directive, as well as practical experience in several Member States, has shown that emissions from large combustion plants can be more cost-effectively dealt with through emission ceilings (possibly in combination with limit values), as compared to the use of emission standards only.

- For emissions of SO2 , the application of flue gas desulphurization, or emission limit values to the same effect, or emission ceilings leading to the same overall reductions, would be necessary for existing large combustion plants in all Member States, with the exception of Greece, Portugal, and partly also of Spain.
- For emissions of NOx , the application of flue gas dentrification, or emission limit values to the same effect, or emission ceilings leading to the same overall reductions, would be necessary for existing large combustion plants in all member states, with the exception of Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Finland, and Luxembourg.


The Commission's proposal for the revision of the LCP Directive will be consistent with the attainment by 2010 of the 50% gap closure interim target for acidification.

- geographical location;
- local environmental circumstances;
- provisions on the minimization of long-distance or transboundary air pollution; and,
- the primary objective of the IPPC Directive, which is to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions in order to achieve a high level of protection for the environment taken as a whole.


The IPPC Directive is also the main tool for bringing reductions in emissions from industrial processes.
According to the results from the analysis carried out in support of the acidification strategy, for the purpose of achieving the 50% gap closure target, it would be cost- effective to apply strict controls on SO2 emissions from industrial processes in all member states of the Community with the exception of Greece and Portugal.
Similarly, ten member states would need to control also NOx -emissions from these sources, the exceptions being Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Finland.
Again, emission ceilings, or economic instruments, are conceivable that could lead to the same overall reductions in a more cost-effective way.

The conclusion from the analysis for the acidification strategy therefore is that, in order to meet the interim target, complementary measures of Community-wide or regional character are needed to reduce emissions from combustion plants and industrial processes.
The legal instruments to use are the revision of the 88/609/EEC Directive on emissions from large combustion plants, and the IPPC Directive.

Action related to emissions from shipping 

When including emissions from international shipping in the optimization for the interim target of 50% gap closure, it was demonstrated to be cost-effective to reduce the SO2 emissions from ships in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea, and to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides in the Baltic Sea, the North Sea and parts of the Atlantic Ocean.
Due to lack of data, the emissions from ships in the Mediterranean were not included in the analysis.
Reduction in SO2 emissions can be achieved by lowering the sulphur content in the bunker fuel oils, and measures to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides include the use of catalytic converters.

The sulphur content of marine bunker fuels is not subject to any international regulation.
There are however proposals to control it under the International Maritime Organization's (IMO) Convention on Maritime Pollution (MARPOL Convention).
This Convention is currently under revision, with the negotiations due for completion towards the end of 1997.
In the preparatory discussions for the revision of the Convention, the countries bordering the Baltic Sea have proposed that this sea area be designated a sensitive zone with regard to emissions of SO2 .
The countries bordering the North Sea are also working towards a similar designation for all, or part, of the North Sea/English Channel.
In such sensitive zones it is proposed that ships should only be allowed to burn bunker fuels with a maximum sulphur content of 1.5%.

The designation of the Baltic Sea and all/parts of the North Sea/English Channel as sensitive zones for SO2 emissions, and the associated restrictions on the sulphur content of marine bunker fuels used in these zones would, according to the Commission's analyses, be a highly cost- effective measure as part of an integrated strategy for combating acidification in the EC.
The Commission therefore considers that, in the context of the current revision of the MARPOL Convention, all member states should support the designation of the Baltic Sea and all/parts of the North Sea/English Channel as sensitive zones for SO2 emissions.
Following the revision of the MARPOL Convention, the Member States should move towards the implementation of the provisions regarding the sensitive zones as soon as practicable.
The Commission will, if appropriate, make proposals to ensure a speedy implementation of those provisions by the Member States.

Action related to countries in Central and East Europe 

Through its external relations, the EC and its member states could play an active role in promoting cost-effective measures outside its jurisdiction.
For example, additional reductions in sulphur emissions, above those agreed under the 1994 Sulphur Protocol, appear to be cost-effective in some countries outside the EC in order to further reduce acidification inside the EC.
Moreover, further control of emissions of NOx and NH3 , as planned for the forthcoming multi-pollutant protocol under the CLRTAP, would also help reduce the exceedance of critical loads for acidification.
It is cost-effective, and in all likelihood necessary for meeting the critical loads for acidification, that additional emission reductions are achieved not only in the member states but also in countries in Central and East Europe (CEE), especially in those neighbouring EC countries.

The emission reductions identified in section 3.3 are based on the assumptions that emission reductions in countries outside the EC will be reduced in accordance with their present current legislation and as required under the various protocols of the UN ECE/CLRTAP.
Such an assumption concerning the development of emissions in non-EC countries is prudent in as much as the EC has only limited influence over the acidification policy to be pursued by these countries.
However, sensitivity analyses carried out by the Commission indicate very clearly that reductions in the acidifying emissions from certain countries, particularly some CEE countries, could allow the EC to pursue more ambitious goals in relation to acid deposition.

The scientific assessment carried out to support the Commission's strategy on acidification, has demonstrated that emissions from certain CEE countries such as Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovenia contribute significantly to the exceedance of critical loads for acidification in the EC (see Annex).
However, the EC would tend to export more acidifying emissions to these countries than it receives.

Nevertheless, it is in general true that emission reduction per unit investment is greater in the CEE countries than in the EC.
For this reason and as long as decisions are made on a case by case basis, it would be possible to identify situations where the promotion of emission reductions in Central and East European countries would be mutually beneficial and cost-effective for all parties involved.
The Community should seek to identify and exploit these "win" situations.
There are several avenues which should be explored in order to realize this objective.

The EC has been developing contacts with ten countries from Central and East Europe (Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia) in order to encourage the approximation of their legislation to Community legislation and so to facilitate the adaptations that would be necessary when and if accession will occur.
Environmental considerations and in particular the adoption of the acquis communautaire in the field of environmental regulation, constitute one of the priority areas for consideration in such a pre-accession strategy.
Within the context of the ongoing dialogue with these countries, the Commission intends to identify acidification as one of the priority areas for discussion in the field of environmental protection.
To this end the Commission will make use of the existing programme Phare and of facilities such as TAIEX (Technical Assistance and Information Exchange Office) and DISAE (Development of Implementation Strategies for Approximation in Environment) with a view to identifying opportunities for intensive collaboration on initiatives aimed at reducing acidifying emissions.

One of the most powerful mechanisms for bringing about a reduction in emissions in the economies of CEE countries is by influencing the pattern of investment, both governmental and private, especially in the energy supply sector.
The Commission therefore intends to pursue discussions with governments, major industrial concerns, and financial institutions with a view to identifying investment strategies which will be optimal with regard to the reduction of emissions which contribute to acidification.

Action related to the Convention on long-range transboundary air pollution 

The UN ECE/CLRTAP is the main forum by which the European Community and the member states can influence and promote emission reductions in countries not members of the EC.
Further action in some of those countries has proven to be cost-effective for the attainment of the interim environmental quality target in the EC of a 50% gap closure.

Moreover, it is necessary in order to achieve the ultimate target, that critical loads are not to be exceeded.
The Commission and the member states should therefore play an active and promoting role in CLRTAP negotiations for a new multi-pollutant protocol, and for the urgent ratification and revision of the 1994 Sulphur Protocol (see section 4.2), to make these contribute to meet the environmental quality targets of the EC on acidification and related problems.

Possible action to reduce emissions of ammonia 

Some environmental EC legislation, already existing or being developed, is expected to lead to reductions in ammonia emissions.
Firstly, the establishment and application of Codes of Good Agricultural Practice through the implementation of the Nitrate Directive (91/676/EEC) is expected to not only reduce nitrate losses to surface and ground water but also has the potential to reduce ammonia emissions.
Secondly, the IPPC Directive (96/61/EC) applies also to large installations for the rearing of poultry or pigs as well as to industrial installations that emit ammonia.
Finally, the covering of manure storage is part of the Communication on a Strategy for Reducing Methane Emissions (COM(96) 557/2) and can achieve reductions of ammonia emissions.

The analysis carried out for this acidification strategy suggest that it is indeed cost-effective to further reduce ammonia emissions.
- techniques that reduce ammonia emission during application of manure (dairy cows, cattle, pigs, laying hens, poultry, sheep), with the exception of a number of countries (i.e. Finland, Greece, Portugal, Spain);
- stable adaptations that reduce emissions from poultry, except in Finland, Greece, Portugal and Spain;
- reducing industrial ammonia emissions, except in Finland, Greece, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain.


Uncertainties surrounding abatement efficiencies, actual and future emission levels and costs of reductions techniques for the livestock sector appear to be more pronounced than for other pollutants.
Since abatement techniques for ammonia are not as well established as for other pollutants, a higher level of discretion for the member states seems appropriate in deciding upon the choice of measures to meet the proposed indicative national emission ceilings.
When setting the national emission ceilings, the results of new research shall be taken into account.

Economic instruments 

Broadening the range of instruments and where appropriate complement normative legislation with market based instruments is one of the five key priorities of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme.
The use of national emission ceilings will create room for member states to implement economic instruments as additional tools in their national strategies.
In addition, the proposals for source-based measures in the previous sections, are in as far as possible, designed so that they create flexibility for using economic instruments.
The use of the national ceilings, however, constitutes the main operational objective and forms an anchoring point for member states for designing national economic instruments (or regulations) that go beyond common minimum environmental requirements.
One can distinguish four main types of instruments:
charges/taxes; subsidies; tradeable emission permits, and environmental agreements.
Regarding the use of environmental levies the Commission has recently adopted a Communication which spells out under which conditions member states can use environmental levies.
The Communication explains the legal framework relating to the single market that member states wishing to introduce environmental taxes and charges must respect.
The Commission has also adopted a Communication on environmental agreements, which clarifies the criteria for the use of this instrument.
The national ceilings and the communications will constitute the main incentive and framework for member states to expand the successful experiences with using economic instruments, where appropriate.

On top of the national use of economic instruments, several areas can be conceived where EC action in the form of economic instruments has value added for meeting the national ceilings or to induce further emission reductions through structural changes in energy use and agriculture, towards meeting the critical loads.
These areas are: energy taxation, shipping dues, agriculture, and joint implementation of national ceilings.

Energy 

In the energy sector, the use of economic instruments could result in fuel switching and improvements in energy efficiency.
This would lower the costs of meeting the proposed national ceilings for both NOx and SO2, while at the same time reducing CO2 emissions.

Differentiated fiscal measures for various energy products can be used for this purpose.
The Commission does not find it appropriate to differentiate fiscal measures in separate Directives for each single environmental problem or product.
Instead the integration of environmental concerns should be part of a more consistent Community excise duty system for energy products, following the request of the Council and the European Parliament.

For this reason, the Commission will take into account the need to steer markets towards a more efficient and cleaner use of fuels in its proposal for a Directive on the taxation of energy products, as requested by the ECOFIN council of 11 March 1996.
This will accommodate more flexible policies at national levels within the Internal Market.
The options being considered consist of a differentiation of the minimum levels of taxation applied to heavy fuel oils, related to the sulphur content, and the explicit possibility for member states to differentiate national tax rates on energy products on the basis of their environmental qualities.

In addition, new energy products could fall under the scope of Community legislation, and future reviews of the Community levels of taxation would take into account environmental objectives.
The proposal is expected to lead to small, but not negligible, reductions in emissions of NOx , SO2 and CO2 .

Shipping 

Section 4.5 reported on the current discussions within the International Maritime Organization (IMO) on setting limits on the sulphur content of bunker fuels.
However, the approaches discussed in the context of the MARPOL are not exhaustive and additional mechanisms are available for reducing SO2 emissions from shipping still further.
In addition the current discussions in the context of MARPOL do not adequately address the issue of NOx emissions from shipping.

One possible further line of action is the use of environmentally differentiated shipping dues.
The Swedish administration seeks to use a general due system, compatible with current shipping dues, for this purpose.
Regarding NOx , the Swedish proposal discusses the option of rebating the operating costs and part of the capital investment of catalytic converters.
Ships would be charged higher environmentally based dues if they do not install catalytic converters.
As regards sulphur, Sweden is considering to increase the average level of the present lighthouse dues and to allow rebates for ships using low (less than 0.5%) sulphur fuel.
In this context, the Commission might further explore the possibility of differentiating shipping dues among a number of member states so as to promote further cost-effective reductions in acidifying emissions.

Agriculture 

In the agricultural sector, it is not necessary to apply a large number of the available technical abatement measures in order to cost- effectively meet the intermediate target of a 50% gap closure.
On top of the potential contribution from further technical measures to the reduction of ammonia emissions, a further evolution of the Common Agriculture Policy (CAP), developing the 1992 approach, might have positive side impacts on the level of ammonia emissions.
Such a development could thus take into account the need of reducing ammonia emissions, bearing in mind that this is only one of the environmental problems challenging agriculture.
Other problems, such as leakage or run- off of nitrates to surface and ground waters, and emissions of methane, are also relevant and could, together with acidification, preferably be addressed in a consistent framework.
In the 1996 review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme, integration of environment into other policy areas is one of the key priorities.
a to further develop links between agricultural market instruments and environmental requirements pursuant to the process of further evolution of the Common Agricultural Policy with reduced reliance on market price support as well as better integration of market policies, rural development and environmental policies;
b to promote extensive production, sustainable farming technologies and organic farming products in close cooperation with the actors concerned: the Regulation (EEC) No 2078/92 provides a good example of such a cooperation and has some potential to contribute to reducing ammonia emissions.


Finally, economic instruments (e.g. fertilizer taxes, which have been applied in some countries) could be explored to induce further emission reductions towards meeting the critical loads.

Joint implementation of national ceilings 

Joint implementation implies that two or more actors cooperate to fulfil specific commitments or obligations.
In the context of the acidification strategy this means the joint implementation of agreed national emission ceilings.
Joint implementation is discussed since it offers more flexibility to meet agreed ceilings at lower costs.
The 1994 Sulphur Protocol states that the Parties to the Protocol may, under specific rules and conditions to be elaborated, jointly implement the obligations (the national emission ceilings).
Some studies show that the potential cost savings of joint implementation are significant.
It is less straightforward how these cost savings could be realized while at the same time meeting environmental quality targets.
The Commission will examine the potential contribution of joint implementation in the context of its future proposal for a Directive on national emission ceilings.

Possible further action related to emissions from transport 

The control of emissions from road transport are regulated by an extensive set of existing Community legislation.
Proposals for new, tightened, emissions and fuel standards, to be introduced by the year 2000, were recently adopted by the Commission.
By the end of 1998, the Commission will come forward with proposals for further vehicle and fuel quality standards to come into effect as from 2005.

A Commission proposal for Community-wide legislation to reduce the emissions from non-road mobile sources is well advanced, and expected to be adopted by Council and Parliament in the near future.
The Commission will investigate the opportunities of further strengthening these emission standards, as well as of expanding them to cover a wider category of vehicles.

Actions to promote energy efficiency and energy conservation 

As described elsewhere in the text (section 3.4 and the Annex) changes in energy consumption and the pattern of energy production may have a significant impact upon the amount of acidifying emissions released to the atmosphere.
As a consequence initiatives aimed at the development of alternative and renewable energy sources as well energy conservation can lead to reductions in acidifying emissions.

At the level of the Community, The JOULE programme is providing insights into the more rational use of energy and energy conservation.
The FAIR programme is inter alia examining the use of renewable raw materials and the production of "clean" energy.
Demonstration programmes such as ALTENER and SAVE will facilitate the development of alternative energy sources and energy saving technologies.
Results from these research programmes and demonstration programmes will influence energy consumption and the balance of energy production from different sources and will as a result lead to a reduction in acidifying emissions.

Finally, in Communication "Cohesion Policy and the Environment" it is underlined that the structural funds are providing incentives for the promotion of environmentally friendly production, among others, to promote renewable energy and use of energy saving technologies.

Review process 

As mentioned above, the ultimate target could not be attained by 2010, even when assuming application of technically feasible abatement measures within the EC.
Therefore, the Commission will have to come back and address this issue again, at a later stage.
The Commission would then review the acidification strategy and evaluate the results attained so far as well as the prospects of member states meeting the emission ceilings required to meet the interim target by the 2010 deadline.
Based on that evaluation, and on possible new scientific evidence on the matter, for example as regards critical loads for acidification, and taking into account measures already taken to reduce emissions, the Commission should identify and propose which additional measures are needed to complement the existing acidification strategy, in order to reach the goal of no exceedance of critical loads.

It is proposed that the Commission, before the end of 2004, should come forward with a report to the Council, presenting the progress made in reducing emissions of acidifying air pollutants, as well as an evaluation of the prospects of member states meeting their emissions ceilings by 2010.
Based on this report, and on possible new scientific evidence relating to acidification, the Commission should present to the Council, before the end of 2004, a revised acidification strategy.

PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS AND THE COSTS OF THE COMMISSION'S STRATEGY 

The Commission's strategy will result in the achievement of the 50% gap closure interim target across the European Community.
Translated into terms of the ecosystem area in each country in which critical loads will be exceeded the Commission's strategy will result in a significant improvement as compared to the situation in 1990 (see Table 5).

Table

Ecosystems where critical loads for acidification are exceeded. 

The situation in 1990, in 2010 according to the reference scenario (REF), and after implementation of the acidification strategy (STRAT) (thousand hectares) In this context it should be recalled that further reductions than those envisaged for the interim target of a 50% gap closure are necessary to meet the ultimate target of no exceedance of critical loads.
Moreover, that acidification is only one of several environmental aspects motivating the need for reduced emissions of sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and ammonia.
Therefore, when considering the possible need and options for measures to abate emissions, also these related aspects should be taken into account (see section 2.2).

The additional abatement costs, that is the annual cost of additional measures as compared to the reference scenario, for the whole of EC from attaining the interim target has been estimated to ECU 7 billion by 2010 (see Table 6).
This estimate is based on the assumptions that the reductions are being obtained by the use of technical measures only.
It should be noted that the abatement options analysed do not take into account non-technical abatement measures, such as structural changes (including fuel switching) in the various sectors.
Furthermore, the Community's international commitments in relation to climate change and the associated reductions in the emissions of "green-house" gases, particularly carbon dioxide, will also imply significant reductions in the emissions of acidifying pollutants and consequently in the estimated costs of the acidification strategy (see section 3.4).
In conclusion, it is therefore likely that the costs for achieving the necessary emission reductions have been overestimated.
A more detailed presentation of the costs associated with the achievement of the 50% gap closure target is given in the Annex.

Table

Additional emission control costs of meeting the interim target (million ECU/year in 2010)

POSITIVE SIDE-EFFECTS/DOUBLE BENEFITS 

Although the focus of this strategy is on acidification (as acid deposition), it is important to note that airborne emissions of the acidifying pollutants have other detrimental effects on the environment.

Reducing emissions of acidifying air pollutants will thus deliver "secondary" benefits, because it helps reducing other environmental problems caused by the same pollutants, such as eutrophication, ground- level ozone, corrosion of buildings and materials, and damage to human health.
Furthermore, emission reductions in the EC will result in deposition reductions in countries outside the EC.
Some of these side-effects have been more thoroughly analysed, namely the impacts on eutrophication and on ozone, as well as the benefits for countries outside of the EC.
Side-effects on air quality have not been analysed in detail, but some conclusions can still be made.
The results are summarized below.

Eutrophication 

The analysis has shown that in 1990, critical loads for eutrophication were exceeded over 34% of the ecosystem area of the EC.
This represents an area of about 38 million hectares.
As a result of emission reductions foreseen by 2010 in the reference scenario, this will be reduced to 19%, or 21 million hectares.
Reductions needed for the interim target of a 50% gap closure, would result in exceedance over 13%, or 15 million hectares, of the ecosystem area.
This would mean an improvement that is more than half of the way from the situation in the reference case towards what was estimated to be maximum technically feasible to attain with measures within the EC.

As a sensitivity analysis, the result of using combined environmental quality targets, based on the critical loads for both acidification and eutrophication, as explicit deposition objectives for the optimization, was evaluated.
The outcome showed some move of emission reductions, from sulphur dioxide to nitrogen oxides and ammonia.
This was especially the case for countries in the south and central parts of the EC, such as Spain, Italy, France, and Germany.
The level of ecosystem protection for eutrophication increased - resulting in less than 10 million hectares exceeded - as did that for acidification.
Also the costs increased:
The total additional costs for this scenario amounted to ECU 9.4 billion, as compared to ECU 7 billion for the main scenario.

Ozone 

The impacts on ground-level ozone was analysed using the EMEP model, based on emissions of NOx as given in the acidification analysis.
Projected emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) for 2010 were taken from the current reduction plans (CRP) of the UN ECE/CLRTAP, which are based primarily on nationally submitted data.

For reasons of consistency and realism, additional emission reductions expected from the auto-oil package of proposals, were included for the EC Member States.

The analysis showed a significant improvement in most member states.
In the reference scenario, by 2010 the exceedance of the critical threshold level for forests, crops and natural vegetation of 40 ppb (parts per billion) as well as of the indicative critical threshold level for health of 60 ppb were reduced over almost the entire EC area, as compared to 1990.
The largest improvements were found in the exceedance of the 60 ppb level, a level used by the CLRTAP as a substitute to indicate possible effects on human health.
The additional emission reductions in the main scenario will lead to further declining ozone levels over most of the affected areas.
In some smaller areas, however, ozone levels would increase slightly.
It is expected that further requirements to reduce VOC emissions will eliminate or significantly reduce this negative side- impact.

Air quality 

As a result of reduced emissions of SO2 and NOx , ambient concentrations of these pollutants, as well as of their secondary products (e.g. particulates and ozone), will be reduced.
This would bring subsequent benefits for human health as well as for buildings and materials, and the historic and cultural heritage.
Some of these benefits were included in a study of economic valuation (see section 6.5).

Improvements outside the EC 

Emission reductions in the EC will, because of the transboundary nature of these pollutants, result in reduced deposition and consequently reduced exceedance of critical loads for acidification in countries outside the EC.
For example, the calculations indicate that the level of ecosystem protection in these countries would by 2010 improve from 97 to 98%, as a result of reductions in the main scenario, as compared to the reference scenario.
Expressed differently, the ecosystem area on which critical loads are exceeded in countries outside of the EC will be reduced from 11 to 9 million hectares.
The biggest improvements, in terms of reduction in the area exceeded, were to be found in Norway, the Czech Republic, Poland, Russia and Switzerland.
By 2010, the exceedance of the critical threshold levels for ozone (see section 6.2) were reduced in all non-EC countries.

As regards eutrophication, in 1990 critical loads were exceeded over 10% of the ecosystem area, that is over 39 million hectares, in the non-EC countries.
The reference scenario would by 2010 reduce this to about 27 million hectares.
Emission reductions in the EC as in the main alternative, would reduce the exceedance further, to about 6%, or 25 million hectares.
The improvements could be found in many of the non-EC countries, but in terms of absolute area protected, they were biggest in the Czech Republic, Norway (where exceedance is brought down to zero), Switzerland, Poland and Hungary.

Economic evaluation of certain benefits 

Further reductions in acidifying emissions will lead to a number of benefits for human health, materials and buildings, crops, forests, and for terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
The economic valuation of these benefits have been the subject of work by DGXII under the so-called ExternE project.
The method developed under that project was applied to estimate some of the benefits of the emission reductions required for attaining the interim target of the acidification strategy.
More specifically, additional monetary benefits resulting from the avoided environmental effects, were calculated.
The consultant evaluated impacts on public health in the form of mortality and morbidity; on crops; and, damage to modern building materials.
A number of major benefits were not assessed in the study, such as the reduced (risk of) forest damage; improvement of forest functioning (e.g. soil stabilization, carbon retention, and biodiversity); improvements in other terrestrial or aquatic ecosystems; and, the impacts on the historic and cultural heritage.

The dominating economic benefits were, according to the study, to be found in reduced damage to human health, primarily as a result of reduced levels of the secondary pollutants sulphate and nitrate aerosols, and ozone.
It was concluded that for EC as a whole, the benefits outweigh the costs.
The largest benefits were to be found in Germany, France, the UK, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium and Denmark.
Only for one country, Ireland, it was found that the additional costs for pollution control outweighed the estimated incremental monetary benefits.
However, if effects of long-term (chronic) exposure to air pollution on mortality were also to be considered, the benefits outweighed by far the costs for all member states.
The inclusion of benefits to ecological and cultural resources, which currently can not as easily be quantified in monetary terms, would further increase the benefits of emission reductions.

In summary, the incremental annual benefits of the additional emission reductions (i.e. those needed on top of the reference scenario to attain the interim target) were estimated to amount to nearly ECU 20 billion in 2010 for the Member States.
Moreover, benefits arising in non-EC countries were estimated to about ECU 4 billion.
In both these figures, the so-called chronic effects on mortality were excluded.

Annex to Communication to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community strategy to combat acidification 

THE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY OBJECTIVE: CRITICAL LOADS 

The critical load indicates the sensitivity of a particular environment by defining how much exposure to pollution it can tolerate before long- lasting or other significant damage occurs.
The concept of critical loads is science-based.
Consequently, the data used reflects current best knowledge and includes a certain level of uncertainty.
Critical loads have significance for sustainable development, since depositions above the critical loads are not sustainable in the long term.

The data on critical loads for acidification that are being used when elaborating the strategy have been developed under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP), and were revised and updated in 1996.
The data have been supplied by the CLRTAP's mapping centre for critical loads, the Coordination Center of Effects (CCE) in the Netherlands.
Of the EC member states, ten countries have produced and submitted national data to CCE; These are Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
Outside the EC, six countries have also done so.
For the remaining five Member States, as well as for other countries in Europe that have not submitted national data, the CCE has estimated critical loads based on information in its European background data base.
In all countries critical loads have been calculated for forest ecosystems, and in several countries also for freshwater ecosystems.
Some countries have calculated critical loads also for peatlands, heathlands and grasslands.

The ecosystem area is the area for which critical loads have been estimated.

When establishing critical loads for acidification, the combined acidifying effect of both sulphur and nitrogen compounds is taken into account.
Their relative share in contributing to acidification will depend on the characteristics of the ecosystems considered as well as on the amount of deposition of sulphur and nitrogen compounds, respectively.

By comparing the critical loads with actual and forecasted deposition levels, the levels of emission reductions - in various combinations - needed to avoid exceedance of critical loads can be quantified.

As there is no single critical load value for each of the three pollutants (sulphur, oxidized and reduced nitrogen) involved, the exceedance of critical loads can not be expressed as the difference between the critical load and the deposition of a single pollutant.

Therefore, exceedance is now expressed in terms of the proportion of the ecosystems in each EMEPgrid cell which is not protected from acidification at a given combination of sulphur and nitrogen deposition in that grid. (An EMEP grid cell is 150 times 150 kilometres, which is the resolution used by the CLRTAP when mapping critical loads on a European scale, and also when monitoring emissions and depositions of air pollutants).
The term ecosystemprotection is used to indicate the percentage of ecosystems in a grid cell, country, or other area, where the critical loads are not exceeded.

The ultimate target of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme, echoed in the Council conclusions from 18 December 1995, is that critical loads should not be exceeded.
This means that for each ecosystem in the EC acid deposition should be lower than the critical load.
As both deposition and critical loads data are mapped in accordance with EMEP grid cell resolution, it was decided to use 100% ecosystem protection in each such grid cell within the EC as a target.
By applying the target for each grid cell, it is also ensured that improvements will take place in all geographical areas where exceedance of critical loads occurs, i.e. that the benefits of emission reductions are widely distributed, rather than concentrated to a few areas only.
In practice, the resulting exceedance of critical loads can be shown both as percentage ecosystem protection country-by-country, and as the specific area remaining as unprotected.

INTERIM TARGETS: THE GAP-CLOSURE APPROACH 

The ultimate target of no exceedance of critical loads for acidification might, for practical and/or political reasons, not be achievable by 2010.

The modelling of future emissions for the purpose of this strategy indicated that even when applying so-called maximum technically feasible reductions in the whole of Europe, it would not be possible to reach the ultimate target for the whole of the EC by 2010.

The Council conclusions of December 1995 recognized the difficulty of meeting the objective of no exceedance of critical loads in the immediate future.
It therefore invited the Commission not only to prepare a more coherent acidification strategy to reach the goal of no exceedance of critical loads, but also to identify interim targets on the path to reaching that goal.

Using a so-called gap-closure approach, the Commission therefore has analysed various possible interim targets.
A similar approach was used in the negotiations for the 1994 Sulphur Protocol under the CLRTAP.

However, due to the more complex critical loads now used - with both sulphur and nitrogen compounds involved - the gap closure is based on grid-by-grid ecosystem protection data.
The concept applied aims at closing the gap, that is the difference, between the level of ecosystem protection in 1990 and the ultimate target of 100% ecosystem protection, by a certain minimum percentage in each EMEP grid cell in the EC by the year 2010.
Based on the ecosystem protection resulting from full application of technically feasible reduction options, the maximum attainable percentage gap closure towards the ultimate goal was determined, and cost-optimized scenarios were consequently constrained to gap closure targets below that figure.

After thorough analysis of several options, it was found that the most appropriate interim target was a 50% gap closure.
In practice that means that in each EMEP grid cell within the EC, the area of sensitive ecosystems in which critical loads where exceeded in 1990, should be at least halved, i.e. reduced by at least 50%.
The main motive for selecting this interim environmental quality target was that it provided the highest level of ecosystem protection at the least cost, given that additional measures are restricted to within the Community.
The reason for applying the gap closure target for each EMEP grid cell was to ensure that improvements should take place everywhere where the critical loads were exceeded, i.e. all affected areas should receive benefits.

Examples:
In one grid cell the ecosystem protection level in 1990 was 40% (i.e. critical loads where exceeded over 60% of the ecosystems).

The 50% gap closure means that the area where critical loads are exceeded - here 60 % - should be at least halved.
In this case the percentage ecosystem protection therefore should increase by a minimum of 30 percentage points.
The end result would be a level of ecosystem protection of at least 70%.
In another grid cell, the ecosystem protection level in 1990 was 80%, i.e. critical loads were exceeded over 20%.
Following the same line of reasoning as above, for this cell, the 50% gap closure would result in a minimum protection level of 90%.

Alternative effects-based approaches to the gap closure approach were considered.
One such alternative could be to minimize the area - or set an interim target for a maximum area - of exceedance within the EC, irrespective of geographical location.
The advantage of this approach is that it would result in a higher level of ecosystem protection at less cost, as compared to the gap closure approach.
The main disadvantage, however, is that the benefits would be concentrated to a few geographical areas, i.e. to a limited number of countries.
Another alternative could be to minimize, or set an interim target for, the absolute exceedance (in terms of e.g. deposition of acid equivalents).
A main problem with this approach is that it implies a linear relationship between the level of exceedance and environmental effects, i.e. the higher the exceedance, the higher the damage.

INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT MODELLING: COST-EFFECTIVENESS 

The strategy shall reach the objective, and possible interim objectives, in a cost-effective manner.
In order to identify the range of technical measures available and their cost-effectiveness for the purpose of reducing acidification, the Commission has chosen to work with integrated assessment modelling.
That method has been used successfully for several years under the LRTAP Convention, and as all member states, as well as the European Community, are parties to that Convention, the method is well known and generally approved by the member states.
Moreover, the choice of this method ensures compatibility with ongoing and future work under the UN ECE/CLRTAP in their development of new international agreements to reduce air pollution.
The consultant chosen by the Commission for the purpose of both the acidification and ozone strategies is the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), that has developed the principal model for integrated assessment, the RAINS model.

The RAINS model can be operated either in the scenario analysis mode or the optimization mode.
The first alternative can be used for the evaluation of emissions, costs, depositions, and environmental impacts resulting from specified emission control strategies, such as current legislation or application of best available techniques.
The optimization mode can be used for minimizing emission control costs for a certain region, subject to the constraint that specified environmental targets, in this case grid-specific acid deposition targets, are attained.
Such an optimization can also be done in combination with given constraints on emission reductions.

- acid deposition is equal or lower than the desired acid deposition target (the 50% gap closure) in each of the grid cells in the EC;
- emissions from each country are always equal or lower than what would result from current legislation or current reduction plans (the reference scenario);
- emissions in countries outside the EC remain equal to what would result from current legislation or current reduction plans (the reference scenario).


In the model, the cost estimates for various abatement options are combined with the projected pattern of energy use and agricultural activity for the year 2010.
Starting from these unabated national emission levels, national cost curves are produced, in which all the technical abatement options are ranked according to their marginal costs.

Non-technical abatement options, such as structural changes, fuel switching, and energy conservation are not included, unless they are assumed in the underlying energy scenario.
This also implies that the model overestimates the abatement costs.

The (static) optimization procedure employs the national cost functions to determine the least-cost allocation for meeting a set of environmental targets at one point in time.
For this purpose investment outlays are recalculated as annual capital costs (annuities), using a discount factor and the technical lifetime assumed.
Annual capital costs are then combined with other costs to determine the total annual costs for each technology.
Annual costs of all technologies are then combined in the national cost functions.
The optimization gives the level of the annual costs in one specific year - in the case of the acidification strategy for the year 2010.
The model does not provide information on the Net Present Value of the costs for a specific time horizon.
Annual costs can be lower or higher than calculated for a specific point in time, depending on the level of energy use and agricultural activity.

The result of the optimization procedure provides a set of national emission ceilings for each acidifying pollutant (see Table 1), determined on the basis of maximum cost-effectiveness for the region analysed.
It also provides information country-by-country on the least-cost technical measures to attain those emission ceilings.
A preliminary assessment of the additional emission control costs associated with the achievement of the 50% gap closure target is presented in Table 2.

Table 1

The emission levels in 2010 which according to the preliminary scientific analysis would be necessary to achieve the 50% gap closure target shown together with projected emissions without the acidification strategy (REF).

Table 2

Additional emission control costs of meeting the interim target (million ECU/year in 2010)

ASSUMPTIONS AND STARTING POINT FOR THE SCENARIO ANALYSIS 

For the purpose of this document, scenario means a series of assumptions on combinations on abatement measures, emissions, costs, and environmental objectives.
A detailed description of the modelling work and its results is given in the first and second interim reports by IIASA on Cost-Effective Control of Acidification and Ground-Level Ozone (contract No B4-3040&bsol;96&bsol;000086&bsol;MAR&bsol;B1), available upon request from the Commission.
For each scenario, data on emissions, the abatement measures assumed to be applied country-by-country as well as their costs, and the resulting exceedance of critical loads for acidification (expressed both as % and hectares of ecosystems unprotected), have been produced.

The baseline 

The base year chosen was 1990, as this was the most recent year for which there were extensive sets of verified emission data available.
The same base year is expected to be used by the CLRTAP when negotiating the new multi-pollutant protocol.
Due to the increasing uncertainty the longer the time horizon being applied when making scenarios, for example as regards energy use, and the fact that any legal obligations entered into by member states must be introduced and implemented in a reasonable time span, scenarios for the acidification strategy were restricted up to the year 2010.

Assumptions on energy use 

For the EC member states, the analysis was based on energy projections provided by DG XVII, extracted from the so-called Conventional Wisdom Scenario, and updated with new official data submitted by one member state.
In the Conventional Wisdom Scenario, a 20% increase in energy consumption and a 10% increase in the emissions of CO2 between 1990 and 2010, is envisaged.
For non-EC countries, energy projections were based on national data officially submitted to the UN/ECE, and published in the UN/ECE Energy Data Base.

In order to reflect the need to reduce CO2 emissions, and also for the purpose of investigating how an alternative energy scenario would impact upon the emissions of acidifying pollutants as well as on the costs for their abatement, a sensitivity analysis was made with a so- called low- CO2 energy scenario, which would result in a reduction in CO2 emissions from the EC of 10%, between 1990 and 2010.

Reference scenario (REF) 

In order to evaluate the need for additional measures, and their respective costs and effectiveness, a reference scenario (REF) was determined.
In order to accommodate the different approaches adopted by countries, two scenarios were constructed:

The first one is the current legislation scenario (CLE):
Based on projections on future energy use, the emission levels resulting from current national, EC, and international legislation were estimated.
For this purpose a detailed inventory of relevant legislation in individual countries, EC Directives, and mandatory technical requirements in protocols of the CLRTAP, was used.
As regards EC-Directives, the scenario includes the Directive on large combustion plants, the Directive on sulphur in liquid fuels, the IPPC Directive, and Directives related to emissions from road vehicles as well as non-road vehicles.
Moreover, proposals adopted by the Commission, such as those of the auto-oil programme, were also included.

The second is the current reduction plans scenario (CRP):
In case countries have officially adopted or internationally submitted (to the UN ECE/CLRTAP) national emission ceilings, or have entered into international agreements on emission reductions (for example by signing protocols under the CLRTAP), the resulting obligations were covered in this scenario.

In order to properly reflect both these types of constraints, when determining the reference scenario the one of these two scenarios (CLE and CRP) that resulted in the lowest emissions by 2010, was then used for the reference scenario.
The specific abatement measures assumed to be applied in the member states for this scenario are presented in full detail in the country-by-country cost-Tables contained in the interim reports by IIASA.

The reference scenario (REF) shows that if current, and well-advanced planned, legislation is fully implemented in all European countries, emissions of SO2 , NOx and NH3 would be reduced by 58, 36, and 16%, respectively, between the base year 1990 and 2010.

The ecosystem area in the EC where critical loads for acidification are exceeded would be reduced from 33 million hectares in 1990 to 9 million hectares.
Expressed in %, the ecosystem protection would increase from 76% to 93%.
The lowest levels of gap closure achieved are less than 10% (in northern Germany/Netherlands, and in northern Finland).

Maximum technically feasible reductions scenarios (MFR) 

In the RAINS-model, the maximum possible abatement of air pollutants is limited by the technical abatement measures available.
For some types of measures, the implementation takes place gradually over time, as is the case for example as regards the effect of introducing new emission standards for new motor vehicles.
The turnover time of the vehicle fleet, which varies between countries, will determine how long it takes until all new vehicles will live up to the new standards.
For that reason two MFR-scenarios have been developed:
the first, called MFR real, shows the maximum technically feasible reductions that can be implemented by the year 2010, assuming a standard turnover rate of motor vehicles and installations.
The second, called MFR ultimate, shows the result after full implementation of the same measures.
And, in addition to MFR real, the vehicle emission standards indicated in the auto-oil programme for the year 2005 were introduced in the latter scenario.
An unrealistically rapid turnover rate is thus assumed, while still assuming energy use as forecasted for the year 2010.
It should be noted that the abatement scenarios presented do not take into account non-technical abatement measures, such as structural changes (including fuel switch) in the various sectors of society.
Thus, the MFR-scenarios tend to underestimate the potential for emission reductions, and to overestimate the costs for achieving the reductions indicated.

According to MFR real, emissions in the EC of SO2 , NOx , and NH3 would be reduced by 91, 69, and 44%, respectively, between 1990 and 2010.
The additional annual costs, as compared to REF, would be ECU 30 billion for the EC.
Ecosystem protection in the EC would reach 99%, leaving 1.1 million hectares unprotected.
MFRultimate would reduce emissions by 92% for SO2 , 84% for NOx , and 44% for NH3 .
Ecosystem protection in the EC would reach over 99%, leaving 0.8 million hectares unprotected.

In order to find out the maximum attainable ecosystem protection levels for the EC by 2010 when limiting further emission reductions to the EC, a third MFR-scenario was investigated, called EUmax.
Here emissions as in MFRreal for the EC and as in REF for the rest of Europe were assumed.

The resulting ecosystem protection level for the EC by 2010 was 98%, leaving about 3 million hectares unprotected.

RESULTS FROM THE SCENARIO ANALYSIS 

Between the extremes of the REF scenario and the MFR scenarios, that is doing nothing more than is expected from current legislation or applying all technically feasible reduction measures, a number of least cost scenarios were elaborated and analysed.

Identifying the interim target 

Initially, three different gap closure targets were investigated, of 45, 50, and 55%, respectively.
For these, deposition targets were restricted to grid cells within the EC only.
Optimization of emission reductions were also confined to the EC, while emissions as in REF were assumed for the rest of Europe, except for the 55% gap closure, where also emissions from ships in the Baltic Sea were included in the optimization.

A given policy constraint for the acidification strategy is that measures to reduce emissions must primarily take place within the EC, since the EC can not impose legally binding commitments/measures outside of its territory.
Therefore, the 50% gap closure was the most relevant to consider, as it is attainable with measures within the EC, and since it results in deposition levels closer to the ultimate target.
Moreover, scenarios with more significant reductions in acid deposition resulted in a sharp increase in marginal costs relative to the additional ecosystem protection obtained (see Figure 1).

Sensitivity analyses 

In order to explore alternative options as well as to check the consistency of data input and robustness of the modelling results, a series of scenarios, based on various assumptions and introducing different constraints, were performed.
The results could be compared with those of the main scenario, i.e. the one aiming for a 50% gap closure, based on optimized emission reductions within the EC.
All of these scenarios achieve the interim target of at least a 50% gap closure of the ecosystem protection in each EMEP grid cell within the EC.

Acidifying air pollutants are transported by winds over long distances, and the potential and costs for emission reductions vary between countries.
Thus, in order to find the least-cost option to meet environmental targets, it was thought worthwhile to investigate if reductions outside the EC could provide a cheaper option than further reductions within the EC.
The following four scenarios explored this issue, and the results are also summarized in Table A1:

Scenario 1: Optimization with ships 

When including emissions from international shipping in the optimization, it was shown to be cost-effective to reduce emissions of SO2 in the Baltic Sea and the North Sea, and those of NOx in the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.
Such reductions would relieve some of the member states from taking more expensive abatement measures on land-based emission sources.
For the EC as a whole, the additional cost of meeting the interim target could be reduced by more than ECU 2 billion per year.

The additional annual costs for measures to reduce emissions from ships was estimated to amount to about ECU 300 million.

Scenario 2: Optimization with whole of Europe, excluding ships 

This scenario explored the cost effectiveness of including non-EC countries in the optimization for taking further action to reduce emissions, while keeping the environmental quality target restricted to the member states.
Under such conditions it was found to be cost effective to further reduce SO2 emissions in Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovenia.
Emission reductions in those countries would replace some measures taken by EC member states, thus reducing the costs for those member states.
For the EC as a whole, the additional annual costs, as compared to the main scenario, could be reduced by nearly ECU 1 billion, a cost-saving of about 14%, while the extra costs for measures taken in those four non-EC countries would amount to about ECU 400 million.
The resulting potential cost-saving thus amounted to about ECU 600 million.
The level of ecosystem protection for the EC would be nearly 97%, with critical loads exceeded over 4.5 million ha.

Scenario 3: Optimization with whole of Europe, EC interim target for whole of Europe 

This scenario explores the Europe-wide perspective, that is assuming the 50% gap closure target and performing cost-optimization for the whole of Europe, including ships.
To attain that target, the emissions in the EC would need to be reduced more than in the main scenario, thus increasing the costs for the EC.
Emissions from international shipping were reduced in all three sea areas.
Moreover, emissions in countries outside the EC would need to be substantially reduced.
The additional annual costs as compared to REF were ECU 8 billion for the EC (nearly on billion more than in the main scenario), 0.5 billion for measures to reduce emissions from ships, and 3.4 billion for measures taken in countries outside the EC, adding up to a total additional cost of nearly ECU 12 billion.
In the EC, the level of ecosystem protection attained was 98%, leaving 2.9 million ha unprotected.
For Europe as a whole, ecosystem protection reached 99%, leaving 6.1 million ha unprotected.

Scenario 4: Optimization with EC, setting sulphur in bunker fuel oil to 1.5% 

In the revision of the MARPOL Convention (see section 4.5 in the Communication) it has been suggested to designate the North Sea and the Baltic Sea as sensitive areas, and thus to limit the sulphur content of bunker fuels used by ships there to maximum 1.5%.
In this scenario it was assumed that such a limit was applied.
It was found that such a measure could reduce the cost for the EC to attain the interim target of a 50% gap closure by more than ECU 1.1 billion.
The additional costs for reducing the sulphur content in bunker fuels was estimated to less than ECU 100 million.
The resulting level of ecosystem protection was slightly lower than for the main scenario:
96.4, as compared to 96.7% - leaving 4.7 million ha unprotected, as compared to 4.5 million ha in the main scenario.

On top of these four scenarios, a number of other issues related to the main assumptions made, were investigated through scenario analysis.
The main results are presented below, and for scenarios 5 and 6, also in Table A2:

Scenario 5: Optimization with EC, using alternative (low- CO2 ) energy scenario 

For reasons described in section 4.2 above, the impacts of assuming an alternative (low- CO2 ) energy scenario was analysed.
In this scenario, the increase in final energy demand was restricted, energy efficiency improved, and the share of renewable sources of energy increased.
As a result, CO2 emissions were reduced by 10% between 1990 and 2010, and moreover, the emissions of SO2 and NOx were also reduced.
For these reasons, less abatement measures were needed to meet the interim target for acidification.

Consequently, the additional annual cost for this scenario was estimated to ECU 2.9 billion, a reduction of more than ECU 4 billion, or nearly 60%, as compared to the main scenario.
It should be noted that costs associated with the shift in energy systems have not been estimated, and could therefore not be taken into account.
The level of ecosystem protection attained was 96.5%, with 4.7 million ha unprotected.

Scenario 6: Optimization with EC, including eutrophication 

A scenario using combined environmental quality targets, based on the critical loads for both acidification and eutrophication, as explicit deposition objectives for the optimization, was evaluated.
Obviously, the outcome of such a combined scenario depends on the environmental quality targets assumed.
In this case, the target for acidification was kept the same (50% gap closure), and a similar target was used also for eutrophication. (To use exactly the same target for eutrophication was found to be infeasible.
Therefore some adjustments were made, and also some infeasible grid cells - on the border of Belgium/France and Netherlands/Germany - had to be disregarded when performing the optimization.) The result was that some emission reductions "moved" from SO2 to NOx and NH3 .
The area unprotected for eutrophication was reduced from 21 million ha in REF (14.6 million ha in the main scenario), down to 9.4 million ha.
There was also some improvement as regards acidification, the area unprotected being reduced to 4.2 million ha.
Total additional costs increased by 40%, to ECU 9.4 billion.

Scenario 7: Optimization with EC, using different UK critical loads 

During the time of preparation of the acidification strategy, it was found that the critical loads data for the UK, specifically, was too low, and that new, correct data could not be submitted in time to be considered in the modelling activities.
By request from the UK, it was therefore agreed to, as a sensitivity analysis, run the model with an alternative set of data, submitted by the UK, where the critical loads for the UK where too high.
This was done, and it was found that such a change did not have any impact on emission reduction requirements for any country.
The only change in the results was that the level of ecosystem protection in the UK increased.

Scenario 8: Optimization with EC, using 95 percentile cut-off point 

For technical as well as practical reasons, the modelling for the acidification strategy used a so-called cut-off point at the 98- percentile level, i.e. the critical loads data for the two % of the most sensitive ecosystems were excluded as targets for the optimization.
The 1994 Sulphur Protocol is based on the so-called 5-percentile critical loads, i.e. here the critical loads data for the five % most sensitive ecosystems were excluded.
To investigate the possible impact of the choice of cut-off point, a sensitivity analysis was made using a 95- percentile.
The results showed some relatively small changes to the effect that Spain could increase the emissions of SO2 from 618 ktonnes in the main scenario to 730 ktonnes, while - most probably as an effect of that - the UK would decrease the emissions of SO2 , from 279 ktonnes to 272 ktonnes.
The overall costs and the ecosystem protection level for the EC as a whole remained about the same. 

Binding grid cells 

Inevitably, when running cost-optimized gap closure scenarios, some EMEP grid cells will be "binding".
This implies that in these grid cells the deposition target is met exactly, while in all other grid cells deposition is lower than the target.
It could be said that these binding grid cells will "drive" emission reduction demands for one or more countries that contribute to deposition over these grid cells.
As a result of the large geographical area involved, for each scenario a number (usually 3-6) of such binding grid cells, well spread out in the north, south, east, west, and central parts of the EC, will occur.
The primary reason being that some grid cells, because of the ecosystems they contain, have lower critical loads than the surrounding grid cells in the region.
In the optimizations performed, the binding grid cells were usually the same in the different scenarios (except for scenario 3, with the target applied for the whole of Europe) appearing in northern Germany/Netherlands, southeastern Sweden (the island of Gotland in the Baltic Sea), eastern Germany, and northern Italy.
Although removing or relaxing the deposition target for such binding grid cells would decrease total abatement costs, it does not necessarily relieve the countries contributing to deposition over those grid cells from action to reduce emissions.
The reason being that other, usually neighbouring, grid cells, will become binding instead.

In some circumstances the deposition/gap closure target set might not be attainable in certain grid cells, which then become "unfeasible".
For example, it was found that three grid cells located on the border between northern Finland and Russia were unfeasible when the optimization of measures was restricted to the EC only.
The main problem of the exceedance in this area was related to sulphur deposition primarily emanating from sources in neighbouring areas of Russia.
In all scenarios, except those including the whole of Europe in the optimization, these three grid squares were deleted from the gap closure targets when performing the optimization.

Again, for the purpose of sensitivity analysis, two additional optimizations were done:
One excluding the binding grid on the island of Gotland in the Baltic Sea, and another excluding the binding grid in northern Italy.

The first case resulted in higher SO2 emissions in Sweden, with the side-impact that the UK would need to lower SO2 emissions somewhat more. 
NOx -emissions in Germany increased, while those in Belgium decreased.
The overall costs for the EC remained about the same, but the level of ecosystem protection was reduced, leaving 4.6 million ha unprotected.

The second case, excluding the binding grid in northern Italy, the main result was that emissions of all three pollutants from Italy remained at the same level as in the REF-scenario, with resulting cost-savings for that country.
A side-effect of that was that emissions of SO2 in the UK and Denmark were somewhat lowered, with resulting increases in costs.
The net result was reduced costs by about ECU 700 million.
As regards ecosystem protection, for the EC as a whole an area of 4.7 million ha remained unprotected.
Specifically for Italy, the unprotected area increased from 103 000 ha in the main scenario, to 246 000 ha.
Some impact could also been noted in surrounding countries, such as Austria, where the unprotected area increased as compared to the main scenario.

Table 1

Overview of results from REF, the main scenario, and scenarios 2-4.

Table 2

Overview of results from, REF, the main scenario, and scenarios 5 and 6.

Figure 1

Cost-effectiveness of scenarios.
