
BUILDING DOORS INTO CELLS

With the help of recombinant DNA technology, researchers have learned how to create artificial pores that might be used to deliver drugs or act as biosensors to detect toxic chemicals. 

The outer membrane of a cell does more than just contain what is inside -it serves as a molecular gatekeeper, carefully regulating what passes in and out.

Nutrients and other desired compounds enter; unwanted molecules remain outside; and waste products pass out of the cell.
But in the perpetual warfare between species, pathogenic bacteria have developed the ability quite literally to penetrate the cell's defenses and disrupt the balance of entry and exit.

The weapons used in battle consist of protein molecules released by the pathogen to bore holes into the cell membrane, allowing foreign material to rush in and some of the cell's contents to leak out.
Interestingly, humans ward off many of these attacks with a similar armory:
the immune system also exploits the properties of its own so-called pore-forming proteins to destroy foreign cells.

In my group, we are examining not only the basic science of how these proteins work but also their potential applications in biotechnology and medicine.

Ideally, we would like to dispatch molecular gatekeepers of our own design.
That way, we could bombard cancer cells with proteins that would damage the cells' outer membranes, making them more susceptible to chemotherapy.
Or we could create synthetic membranes with artificial pores embedded in them to serve as biosensors or drug delivery agents.

Bacterial pore-forming proteins exhibit a range of characteristics. 
The protein alpha-hemolysin, which I shall discuss in this article, is secreted by the common bacterium Staphylococcus aureus , which causes staph infections. 
The protein assaults target cells by forming pores approximately two nanometers in diameter -sufficiently large to permit small molecules such as the sugar sucrose to pass through but too small for larger molecules, including most proteins.
In contrast, streptolysin-O, from the bacterium Streptococcus, can make pores exceeding 30 nanometers in diameter.

Like a alpha-hemolysin, streptolysin-O causes cell damage or death by piercing the cell membrane.

Another kind of protein, known as an S-layer protein, provides a defensive envelope for bacteria;
it forms flat sheets with numerous openings of roughly uniform size, between two to six nanometers across, depending on the type of bacterium.
The pores in these sheets allow selected nutrients to reach the cell membrane for transport into the cell.

Mushroom-Shaped Pore

In my work, I have chosen to study the protein alpha-hemolysin for several reasons.
It can be produced in large amounts (a few grams if necessary) from bacterial cultures;
the structure is fairly small, with only 293 amino acid building blocks, making it simple to alter by recombinant DNA technology; and the molecule is extremely stable compared with other proteins. 
The structure of the gene that encodes the protein was published in 1984 by Gary S. Gray, then at Biogen, and Michael Kehoe, then at the University of Geneva.
Just last year J. Eric Gouaux, now at Columbia University, and his research group determined the three-dimensional structure of the alphahemolysin pore, demonstrating that it exists as a mushroom-shaped complex of seven alpha-hemolysin molecules.

Research by Sucharit Bhakdi's team at the University of Mainz in Germany suggests that alpha-hemolysin can assemble into a pore in two ways.
Certain cells, such as rabbit red blood cells, have on their surface special receptors that bind to alpha-hemolysin;
these receptors may either trigger pore formation or help to orient the hemolysin structure correctly on the cell membrane.
But conveniently, even in the absence of such receptors, alpha- hemolysin molecules can still function; 
on artificial membranes (made from a double layer of molecules known as lipids), the proteins organize themselves, or self-assemble, into pores.
The proteins will also spontaneously assemble when mixed with certain laboratory chemicals related to common detergents.
Self-assembly offers real advantages to biotechnologists seeking to manufacture products based on alpha-hemolysin, because otherwise troublesome aspects of the production process will take care of themselves.

Recent work on alpha-hemolysin by my lab and by Bhakdi's and Gouaux's groups has also helped clarify many details concerning how the opening actually forms.
Once individual alpha-hemolysin molecules bind to a cell membrane or an artificial lipid membrane, they consolidate into groups of seven in what is known as a prepore complex.
The center of each monomer consists of a long strand of approximately 40 amino acids;
investigators have now determined that this strand burrows into the cell membrane to become part of the lining of the channel.

Open Sesame

My goal on starting this research was to use the techniques of protein engineering to manipulate three essential properties of the alpha-hemolysin pore: the size of the opening, the selectivity of the channel for letting different molecules pass through, and the pore's ability to open and close.

Under normal circumstances, the alpha-hemolysin pore is open.
It displays only a slight preference for allowing negatively charged molecules to pass through (rather than positively charged or neutral molecules), but this bias is quite minimal. 
For the purposes of my work, the opening turns out to be just the right size -a bigger or smaller channel would be more difficult to remodel.
Therefore, I consider the alpha-hemolysin pore to be a blank slate, ready to be modified by protein engineering. 

Nevertheless, when I began, I had little idea how opening and closing the channel, seemingly the most difficult of the three tasks, might be achieved.
But researchers in my laboratory have been able to place molecular triggers and switches into the protein that prompt the pore to open or close on command. 
Our attention has focused on this aspect of the work because of its considerable practical implications.

Protein engineering has been our technique of choice because it permits the amino acids in a protein to be replaced with other naturally occurring amino acids or even with "unnatural" amino acids made in the laboratory.
We can therefore put a variety of potential triggers and switches into alpha-hemolysin and explore which ones will work.

In principle, molecular switches might be biochemical (activated by enzymes) or chemical (activated by the binding of small molecules to the protein).

Activation by a physical stimulus, such as heat or light, is another possibility.
As it turns out, all three approaches have been successful with alpha-hemolysin.

With the help of Barbara J. Walker of the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, where I began this research, I have introduced a biochemical trigger into alpha-hemolysin by first adding a small polypeptide chain -between 11 and 53 amino acids- to the central strand of the protein that ordinarily breaks through the cell membrane.
This additional segment blocks the opening of the pores;
subsequent treatment of the protein with an enzyme known as a protease clips off this extra piece, allowing pore formation to proceed.

Biochemical triggers might be used to make alpha-hemolysins that penetrate only selected cells.
For example, specially modified hemolysins could be guided to a tumor with the aid of antibody fragments (chosen to recognize cancer cells) built into the protein's structure by genetic engineering.
When these hybrid proteins reach the cancer cells, pore formation could be activated by the proteases released by the cancer cells. (Metastatic cancer cells secrete enzymes known as tumor proteases that assist the cells both in their escape from primary tumors and in their colonization of new sites.) The altered hemolysins would begin drilling holes into the cancer cells, thereby enhancing their permeability and hence susceptibility to various cytotoxic drugs. 
As a step in this direction, Rekha G. Panchal in my group created mutant alpha-hemolysins that are activated by tumor proteases. 

Eventually, it may be possible to insert a biochemical switch that could turn pore-forming activity both on and off, rather than just turn it on.
Dan W. Urry of the University of Alabama at Birmingham has modified the shape of a synthetic protein and then returned it to its original configuration with the help of enzymes by exploiting what is called a phosphorylation reaction.
We have begun to adapt Urry's methods to create biochemical switches that would enable us to open and close the alpha-hemolysin pore repeatedly.

Chemical Triggers

We have also introduced a second type of trigger into the structure of alpha- hemolysin that is activated by certain small, highly reactive molecules.
We believe this technology can be adapted to produce sensitive artificial membranes for use in biosensors that detect toxic molecules, including pesticides and nerve gases.
Investigators in my laboratory have designed a mutant version of alpha-hemolysin that is embedded in the surface of a liposome (a microscopic sac made of a lipid bilayer membrane) and assembles into an open pore when a highly reactive organic compound attaches permanently to a genetically engineered region of the structure.
The opening of the channel can be detected by the release through the pores of fluorescent dye put inside the liposome when it is assembled.

We have also developed a chemical switch that can be turned on and off repeatedly by the binding of metal ions to the protein. 
Such a switch would be useful for taking repeated measurements with biosensors.
Replacing five assorted amino acids on the central strand of the protein with five copies of the amino acid histidine creates a site where zinc and other metal ions can bind to the protein, thus blocking pore formation.
Assembly of the pore continues when the metal ion is removed. 
Once the hole opens, the ion can seal the pore again by binding to the central channel and obstructing the passage of other molecules.

The sealing and resealing process can be repeated numerous times.

This so-called H5 structure (shorthand for five histidines), as well as other, related hemolysins constructed by Walker and Stephen Cheley in my Worcester group, could be effective as highly responsive biosensors for monitoring metal pollutants.
Indeed, we have been developing such devices in collaboration with John J. Kasianowicz of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
The U.S. Navy is also very interested in the rapid and continuous measurement of metal ions in seawater -it would like to devise tracking systems that can detect trace amounts of metals leached from enemy ships- and so the Office of Naval Research has sponsored this aspect of our work.

Recent advances in protein-engineering techniques and the new information on the structure of alpha-hemolysin have enabled Orit Braha and her colleagues in my lab to improve on the H5 molecule by making pores in which not all of the subunits are identical.
In one example, six of the subunits are unaltered, but one contains a site where a metal ion can bind.
When the metal ion binds, an electric current (sent through the pore by an applied potential field) changes.

The fluctuation in this current gives both the concentration and the identity of the ion present.
Notably, the oscillating signal from one pore can be used to measure several metals at once;
an array of sensors could handle a complex mixture of substances.
Another advantage of these sensors is their size:
because binding at just one pore is sufficient to obtain a current reading, these sensors can be extremely small. 

Thousands if not millions of different modifications can be made to pore-forming proteins, resulting in an extraordinary array of potential biosensors.
We are currently developing sensors for nonmetallic substances as well.
Kasianowicz and his colleagues have shown recently that single strands of large molecules such as DNA can also be detected as they move through the pore.

The findings with H5 offer an illustration of the interplay between biotechnology and basic science.
The structure provided not only a prototypical component for a sensor but also revealed information about how the pore functions:
the work with H5 helped to demonstrate that the central strand of the natural protein lines the interior of the pore.

Light Switches

In thinking about designing an alphahemolysin that would be activated by a third type of switch -a physical stimulus- I noted that there are naturally occurring membrane channels that can be physically activated by either mechanical impulses or voltage applied across the cell membrane.
In most circumstances, however, activation by light is a more attractive option:
light does not interfere with many natural processes, and it can be applied with exquisite spatial and temporal control.

Besides, I had spent from 1974 to 1979 as a graduate student in the lab of Jeremy R. Knowles at Harvard University developing light-sensitive chemicals for investigating the structure of membrane proteins.
Therefore, I was not surprised when after an interval of many years, photochemistry and membrane proteins were reunited in my research group, but with quite a different focus.

Our approach relied on the light-sensitive structure of nitrobenzyl compounds, which were first used in organic synthesis in the 1960s by Jack A. Barltrop, then at the University of Oxford, and later adapted for small biological molecules by Jack H. Kaplan and his colleagues, then at Yale University.
We developed a nitrobenzyl derivative, called bromonitrophenylacetic acid (BNPA), that after binding to the protein will switch off the pore formation process.

To accomplish this, workers in my group first introduced a single cysteine amino acid at a key site in the protein.
When the cysteine reacts with the BNPA, the protein becomes inactive.
The protein's activity could be regenerated by exposing it to ultraviolet radiation -at wavelengths that do little damage to most cells.
Eventually, researchers may be able to make pore-forming molecules that can be turned on with light of one wavelength and off with light of another wavelength.
They might also build hybrid switches in which a protein is, say, turned on with light and off with metal ions. 

The present technology, however, has immediate applications in the laboratory:
researchers often need to make selected cells in a tissue sample porous without altering any of the other cells.
In this way, small molecules that probe the activity of the cell can be introduced, while crucial proteins remain inside.
In my laboratory, we have been able to make single neurons in a collection of neurons permeable by shining light on the chosen cell.
Engineered hemolysins exposed to the light penetrated the selected neuron;
the rest of the neurons remained intact.
By using sophisticated optical devices, it will be possible to make just one region of a neuron permeable by shining light on that area of the cell.

One of the most exciting applications for pore-forming proteins lies in the area of drug delivery.
For example, drugs could be transported inside liposomes and, with the help of any of the triggering techniques mentioned earlier, released on command through artificial pores implanted in the membrane. 
In addition, biomedical researchers have considerable interest in encapsulating enzymes or even entire cells, thereby protecting them from attack by a patient's immune system.
Once the enzymes are shuttled to the desired location, they might be used to destroy toxic substances that build up in people with certain genetic disorders, such as phenylketonuria, in which the body cannot properly metabolize the amino acid phenylalanine. 
The condition can ultimately lead to nerve cell damage. 

Encapsulated cells could be used to deliver hormones lacking in people with diseases such as insulin-dependent diabetes.
Drugs, enzymes and cells within membranes bearing artificial pores would provide a level of control over where, when and how much of the medication is delivered that improves markedly on existing technologies.

Other bacterial pore-forming proteins with quite different properties -including the streptolysin-O and S-layer proteins- are also being reengineered in our laboratory and elsewhere. 
Uwe Sleytr and his colleagues at the University of Agricultural Sciences Vienna have already adapted the naturally occurring sheets of pores created by S-layer proteins for use in filtration devices.
These sheets have also served as templates to form nanoscale grids by metal vapor deposition in work by Ken Douglas and Noel A. Clark of the University of Colorado in Boulder and Kenneth J. Rothschild of Boston University.

In my lab, we are attempting to build triggers and switches into designer pores -polypeptides based only loosely on natural structures- as pioneered by Maurice Montal and his co-workers at the University of California at San Diego.
Designer proteins based on the alpha-hemolysin structure, for instance, might have additional utility as antimicrobial agents if they could be made to disrupt the outer membranes of microbes selectively. 

There is still much to be done through protein engineering of alpha-hemolysin itself.
For example, we are currently investigating techniques to improve the mechanical and heat stability of alphahemolysin pores used as components of biosensors.
Workers are also examining chemical modifications to reduce immunogenicity of alpha-hemolysin -its tendency to provoke an attack by the immune system- for biotherapeutic applications; 
immunogenicity now stands as a major hurdle for all biotherapeutics. 

If these challenges can be addressed, more futuristic possibilities may emerge for this technology.
Pore-forming proteins might be used as conducting components in molecular electronic devices.
Although proteins are relatively large for this role by present-day standards, they do have sophisticated properties, such as the ability to recognize other molecules, a capability that cannot be built into inorganic materials.
Two-dimensional crystals that are formed readily by alpha-hemolysin and S-layer proteins might serve as templates for ordered arrays of molecules in the emerging science of nanotechnology.
It might even be possible to design membranes that, by allowing only certain molecules to pass through, could be used to create highly selective filters to purify such substances as drugs, contaminated water or blood.
The field of pore- forming proteins is just beginning to open up.

Figure 1

Puncturing cancer cells will make them more permeable to cytotoxic drugs.

Researchers are developing an altered version of alpha-hemolysin that includes an antibody fragment that both recognizes receptors on cancer cells and prevents pore formation. 
When the modified alpha-hemolysin reaches the cancer cell, tumor proteases -proteins secreted by all tumors- will snip off the antibody fragment (a).
After seven of the protein subunits converge (b), the pore opens (c).

Figure 2

Doors into cells can be opened and closed repeatedly on command.

When metal ions bind to the modified protein called H5, the channel cannot form (a).
Removing the metal opens the pore (b);
adding the metal reseals the pore (c).
This technique has been used by Mehmet Toner's team at Massachusetts General Hospital to introduce cryoprotectant chemicals into living cells that must be frozen for storage.

Figure 3

Biosensors made from artificial pores can detect a variety of substances.

A carefully modified alpha-hemolysin protein (only one of the seven subunits, shown in pink, has been altered to bind to metal ions) partly closes when a metal is attached (a) and opens when the metal is removed (b).
The magnitude and duration of the changes in electric current sent through single pores identifies the kind of metal present (inset);
the frequency of the current shifts reveals the concentration. 

Figure 4

Beam of light can clear a pathway into cells.

Light can be directed at particular cells -for example, in a neuron (inset)- very precisely, so researchers can use this method to control which cells they will make permeable. 
Light-sensitive molecules attached to the modified alpha- hemolysin protein prevent a pore from forming (a) until they are removed with light (b).
Once the molecules are gone, the pore will open (c).

Figure 5

Artificial pore can penetrate a cell membrane or an artificial membrane made of a double layer of fats, or lipids.

Such channels, formed from modified versions of the bacterial protein alpha- hemolysin, can be designed to control the passage of drugs or other molecules.

Figure 6

Microscopic pores are made by a variety of proteins.

The author has studied derivatives of alpha-hemolysin that generally form openings roughly two nanometers in diameter. 
Certain versions can be larger, though, up to six nanometers in diameter (a).

Figure 7

The protein streptolysin-O can make pores exceeding 30 nanometers across (b).

A third type of protein, an S-layer protein, forms sheets of pores of uniform size;
the pores shown in c are about three nanometers in diameter.

Figure 8

Parts become a hole as individual alpha-hemolysin molecules (a) attach to the surface of a membrane (b).

Once seven of the molecules converge (c), the thin strand of amino acids in the center of each subunit burrows into the membrane to form the channel (d).
The three-dimensional structure of the mushroom-shaped pore was only recently determined by x-ray crystallography (far left);
each color represents a different alpha-hemolysm subunit.
